# Topic: Controversial discussions

--- Conversation 1 (2023-03-24) ---
User_8e115b: On the topic of Minerva rotation - I am starting to wonder less about its impact on me, and more about our (Minerva's) impact on the rotation cities. Because at the end of the day, our personal development is hugely given by our motivations (eg you don't need Minerva to travel, live, and work in many countries, or interact with many people) but our collective impact is something that is more "rigid" in the sense that one person cannot change it. And I keep wondering whether we dont create more harm than good by our lifestyle and interactions with our surroundings - like in a huge sense we are indeed adding to the over-tourism problem and too much flying problem, as well as living privileged lives anywhere we go (yes, I would say that everywhere we are better off than majority of the people living in the area where we live). Also, the temporarity of our stays adds to the inability of working long-term on anything, creating deeper connections, being more than a visitor, and also disposability of things.

Tldr: I do have many questions about the impact of Minerva rotation but it isn't related to personal growth
User_8e115b: I think we are overexxageraing this effect. I just checked and Taipei get 10 million tourists each year, and BA gets 3 million. Every city we visit is often a big city so minervans just dont change the numbers much (like 0.0001%<).

Although overtourism does exist, I think for a lot of people tourism is good. It brings in revenue. In every place I've been to locals seemed to be happy with minervan presence. There are places with overtourism where tourists damage the local historical buildings or leave lots of trash around but I would like to believe minervans are better than the average tourist at that. It seems Taiwan has overtourism problems specifically on its islands, but I think BA is fine with and wants more of it? Maybe you and other interested people can prepare material on how minervans can be aware of these issues and not contribute to the problem.

Similarly I think the flights are just a necessary part. Planes do emit lots of co2 and It would be nice if people flew less, but I think the flights we are taking outweight the environmental damage. I do hope we get electric planes in the future though. Aaand another quick search (https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20191129STO67756/emissions-from-planes-and-ships-facts-and-figures-infographic) shows me planes only emit 4% of total greenhouse gasses, while cars emit 20%. To me it feels like the plastic straw problem. It sure would be nice cut that, but it is better and easier to cut all the other one use plastics like the bags that have better alternatives (as we all know paper straws suck)

How do you think minervans contribute to over tourism? Does minervans do more harm than good to the rotation cities? 
And do you think there is a way for us to use our privilege in a better/different way?
What should we do instead of taking all those flights? Just not travel?

--- Conversation 2 (2023-04-10) ---
User_8e115b: but it always strikes me that calling out how this institution is fucked up  is always like kicking a wasps nest where there is more interest in defending the idea of it  with clever questionings and pedantery than to actually improve it.
User_8e115b: I'm moving this to here to not hog the main chat :P
User_8e115b: I agree. Minervans have this habit of shooting down people without even understanding why they are disagreeing with them. Instead of bashing people that raise issues (from a standpoint you don't agree with) we should be more open minded and try to understand their point of view, and figure out what causes them to feel that differently. 

but at the same time I literally read the message chain again (while keeping in mind that people are trying to help instead of looking for a fight) and I cannot figure out what made you Topaz feel like people are fighting you. You asked a nice question that explained your point of view, then people asked you for clarification because they don't feel the same way. After this comment things do get pretty hostile though.
User_8e115b: I think Institutionalized racism is still a problem in minerva, just to a lesser extend than other schools. But the thing I'm more interested in is this close mindedness to other point of views in minerva. People just fight and list all the reasons why someone is wrong instead of trying to see why they can be right. Like maybe [handle] had a truly bad experience, we don't know. Just because others don't feel it doesn't mean someone in her position don't feel it. And even if there are steps taken to alleviate the issue if those steps aren't clearly visible to students of course they' won't feel good about it. Are the things you've listed are somewhere in the hub [handle] ?
User_bbcb04: Assignment instructions are not really available on Portal, but I've hyperlinked the readings in my previous message, or you can access the latest NS51 course syllabus (linked here (https://course-resources.minerva.edu/uploaded_files/mu/00315526-0783/ns51-syllabus.pdf)) or Prof. Moy's LinkedIn profile (linked here (https://www.linkedin.com/in/wu07moyc/)).

--- Conversation 3 (2023-04-10) ---
User_8e115b: I was more talking about a page on my minerva that says: "things minerva is doing to combat XYZ issues" around this issue
User_bbcb04: Not sure what you mean, but there's this DEI report that Minerva releases periodically, here's (https://my.minerva.edu/resources/deb-report/) the latest one in Oct 2022

--- Conversation 4 (2023-09-05) ---
User_e04c25: I feel like Minerva should create a "local AI" that would answer questions about HCs, LOs etc without extrapolations in addition to the handbook.

--- Conversation 5 (2023-09-25) ---
User_5170f0: I mean it's possible to do as a student, if you scrape the data from HC Handbook and use it to fine-tune an LLM
User_5170f0: There're so many little and big things that can be better in Minerva's digital toolset, more specifically Forum and MyMinerva,

I was thinking about this for the last few weeks, wondering about the ways to help with this, 

Do let me know if you had similar thoughts or have useful insight into the topic

--- Conversation 6 (2023-11-20) ---
User_94cad8: I tried training my own GPT but it's complaining about too much information sometimes. So I thought I could make 4 of those. One for each cornerstone class. Anyone interested in using it? (I think you need GPT 4 subscription for it)

--- Conversation 7 (2023-11-22) ---
User_4bde84: hows everyone using chatgpt/microsoft copilot in your work? do you use them actively to help your writing/coding, is your civic project/internships fast/slow at adopting the tech? copilot def can code faster than me, so I'm exploring how to best approach it

--- Conversation 8 (2024-01-03) ---
User_a10c53: people don't wanna expose themselves

--- Conversation 9 (2024-01-04) ---
User_c10951: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mb4SWtqyi1iEGCn2uTnHkPHqW3UoQr8b0xv5_81a-4Y/edit?usp=sharing
User_c10951: Here is some Tools and where to use them

--- Conversation 10 (2024-01-05) ---
User_c10951: I ask chat gpt for coding advice a lot. But nothing I wouldn't ask Google otherwise and browse through the help Forums for
User_c10951: For my Master thesis we have to sign a declaration what we used
User_c10951: I have no idea though if we are allowed to do it or if that is how they plan to get us for plagiarism

--- Conversation 11 (2024-02-22) ---
User_5170f0: Turk is in my heart anyway
User_5170f0: [handle] here you go
User_5170f0: A more expanded statement would be, 16 Turk Residential Hall is much better than 851 California for a number of reasons, some of which are quite personal for me, and some are quite generalizable.
User_f644b9: Yeah we didn’t have the other res hall
User_f644b9: And don’t get me wrong I loved the street I knew most people living on it by name
User_f644b9: But too much death
User_5170f0: RIP to all

--- Conversation 12 (2024-12-30) ---
User_c7aeb3: https://www.tiktok.com/t/ZP8NEhGt9/ — comments are free trigger material for minervans ✨
User_c63129: it’s like everyone got it on their fyp yesterday
User_c7fdd7: https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/the-minerva-delusion/
User_c7fdd7: i found this article linked in the comments :0
User_2c19b9: Bruh it's from 2012 when Minerva wasn't even open yet 😭

--- Conversation 13 (2024-12-30) ---
User_f19ed6: the real trigger material is "M29" what do you mean it's already 2029 😭
User_51212c: Mood 😭
User_9cb696: thank you for referring me to comments that raised my blood pressure this morning i’m attacking them back idc
User_9cb696: genuinely tho, i really think when these types of things happen just leaving a comment that says “i go to this school, it’s not a scam” goes a long way because people DO read the comments and will think whatever has the most likes is the most reliable information.
User_9cb696: i think it’s a problem that there are more discussions about minerva than there are minervan student voices on the internet because silence makes us look more like this far off enigmatic (and hence scammy) thing
User_51212c: I think we learned at some point that it's more productive to protect our energy too. It can be tiring to "fight back" (speaking as someone who posted an AMA on r/SGExams for two years) and sometimes the people who get swayed by haters also don't share Minervan values
User_9cb696: i agree and im not saying you should fight all the haters. saying “i go to this school it’s not a scam” takes like 2 seconds and its a small thing that adds up with time

--- Conversation 14 (2024-12-31) ---
User_09dde9: i think the most important thing is not to focus on the admission rate. that’s more of a hype than reality as we all know it. focus more on the learning experience and the community rather than some messed up meritocratic system

--- Conversation 15 (2025-01-02) ---
User_455221: If you read it like a comedy roast it's pretty funny

(If that's your thing, ofc)

--- Conversation 16 (2025-04-30) ---
User_51212c: When AI replaces almost every knowledge-based job, what will you do?
User_2d7394: Be dead.
User_e40c81: 21st century luddite movement
User_c7fdd7: i don’t think we will be alive for that
User_0beb24: Laundry and cooking
User_3f620b: Paint and be a garder fairy 🧚‍♀️
User_09dde9: we would’ve created more interpersonal careers eg building relationships and bringing people together!
User_74a5d5: Revolt with the working class, in the not implausible case that the wealth and power disparity of today is something laughable compared to that future time
User_74a5d5: Like the companies extracting the most use and profit from AI right now is concentrated among the already well off companies/govs. So unless something really forces the people helming AI to distribute wealth and opportunities (who's gonna force that? lol)
User_74a5d5: And then now I'm thinking, an AI future that doesn't posit the livelihoods of regular, working people at the front (the utopia some desire for when robots take over) and instead gets returns through profit is more like the status quo systems issue more than a 'inconsiderate greedy people being leaders' issue

--- Conversation 17 (2025-08-21) ---
User_09dde9: which one would u rather have
User_09dde9: without considering the actual classes😅

update: i took the advice and will go with the “before”
User_6c7187: I hope that copyright strike lawsuit gets them in their asses
User_6c7187: their only defense is : if we get sued we will lose money
User_af01b7: Don't give yourself a 9.5 hr night gap between classes. Don't do it
User_09dde9: and have class every day instead?🥲
User_af01b7: monday evening though 👀 (but also i would rather eat dirt than have an evening class so idk in general)
User_09dde9: (also #context, tthr 8am is with gale...)
User_09dde9: wed fri 8am with powers🤩

--- Conversation 18 (2025-08-22) ---
User_5170f0: I have such a wonderful topic for this channel, but it'll have to wait a year or two.

--- Conversation 19 (2025-09-19) ---
User_4035d1: just a friendly reminder that this chat exists :) to be used as wanted haha
User_4035d1: and as needed...
User_45b134: I love you Syd idk if it's gonna work XD
User_45b134: or is it with a y
User_4035d1: y :)
User_9d3fa5: yeahhh, i don't think the discussion is moving here
User_45b134: yeah that's better
User_45b134: I had a feeling as soon as I typed it your  name is still just the cat emoji in my contacts XD
User_4035d1: 🎵 ~where are you ~ 🎵
User_11d9d9: Happy to move it here.
User_6c7187: Abortion was the issue that people focused on.

What I would say is that you don't realize how incredibly dismissive you show yourself to be of the question and the moral implications here.

"issues that should shock your moral values to your core, in such a way that you would be willing to advocate for them." that is red herring. If I talk about something else, you tell me the quotes of JPII are not related to abortion. If I focus on abortion, you tell me I didn't talk about enough issues.

Pick one.


/// This is just not true because you only brought up the quotes of the pope in order to talk about abortion
User_11d9d9: I brought them to talk about immigration too.
User_6c7187: And barely developed on that, so your argument about it being red herring doesn't make sense
User_6c7187: you have to admit you used the quotes to talk about abortion
User_11d9d9: I took this photo myself in the John Paul II Shrine Museum in Washington, D.C.

I agree with this quote, even when the country falls short of its most noble ideals.
User_11d9d9: Here it is.

It does mention immigration, it's quite an important part of the quote.

And my original message talked about immigration, too.

I have brought it up many times.
User_6c7187: all that I ask from you and other libertarians is that you use all these moral issues that you have and put then towards useful discussion: how can we ensure the US starts following these principles of respect for human dignity (it never has, btw) and make it responsible for its own future? instead of discussing hypothetical situations or reducing arguments to premises are so took of their nuances that they don't apply to real life anymore
User_6c7187: there are so many things you could put in that introduction, but it seems that libertarians and conservatives love trying to bring up abortion every single time
User_11d9d9: I am happy to agree on doing our best to ensure every country follows these principles of respect for human dignity.
User_31e7ce: On the note of the magical DNA that's is unique being made, I suggest you revisit Charlie Kirk's debate with Cambridge student's (where you might got your new DNA = life statement from) One student explicitly explain why we could not impose moral obligation to a set of rearranged chromosome, (fusing DNA from father and mother) and just suddenly call them "life", when no suffering and consciousness is in the picture. Thus this is exactly why, anti-abortion wouldn't be the standpoint of "pro-life" Watch from 31:35 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dkiM-z0Mzyg)
User_8e115b: [name] why do you care so deeply about abortion? Why do you want to save them?
User_a4a8ef: Since Jose's been emphasizing how we just picked on the abortion part of his message (weirdly it was the first thing mentioned out of all libertarian causes including free market lol) I'd also like to point out the absurdity of assuming a common ground between the so-called libertarians and conservatives. People so adamantly against government control and so in love with freedom assuming themselves as closer allies to conservatives who openly reject the freedom of movement, sexual identity, religion, etc. for thousands. How and why do you see yourself aligned with the ones concerned with conserving a status-quo that's incredibly restricting for many communities when you yourself claim to be all about freedom and autonomy
User_11d9d9: I actually had never watched that video.

We actually also don't need to fixate on DNA.

My claim was that a fetus is a unique and unrepeatable human being.

That is true. Do you agree?

If we agree, then we don't need to bring up DNA. I brought it up to support that it's a unique and unrepeatable human being, but there are other ways to support that.

Nevertheless, I don't find it to be a controversial claim. From day zero you know that the fetus is a unique and unrepeatable human being. You won't meet that person again.
User_8e115b: when government ceases too much control then you cant exercise many of your personal freedoms anymore. nobody wants to be afraid of their live when they are giving a public speech, or using the metro.

(not agreeing on any other part of the message, just the liberal + conservative "union" we are seeing nowadays)
User_8e115b: and like come on, we are both coming from a country with a fairly weak government and the general consensus is "get out of here asap"
User_a4a8ef: the government here isn't weak. it's too incompetent yet strong, which is the root cause of our problems. state has very strong capacity when it comes to taxation, law enforcement, national identity, etc. yet all these resources are exercised in a super oppressive manner against the common good. that's what makes us wanna run away
User_11d9d9: So what if I put it first? What do you want me to reply to you seriously. I could have put it second, and maybe people would have fixated on that still. Or maybe people could have fixated on something else. We won't know anyways.

"libertarian" causes, well, evidently some causes are very conservative you seem to agree, so I don't know the issue there too. I said the group will be called "Minerva University Conservatives & Liberatarians..."

How do I see myself aligned? Read the rest of the post. You may not know but many of the statements are inspired in mission statements of organizations who fall across the spectrum.

At any rate, the people who agree with many of the views, even if not all of them, will know for themselves to what extent it resonates.

In the end, focus less on the labels, and more on the ideas. The label matters less, the arguments more.
User_11d9d9: I am Pro-Life because I believe that Life is the highest of all Inalienable Rights and that the government has a legitimate role in protecting that right against what I strongly believe is an attack to the infinite dignity of the human person.
User_8e115b: But why care about them instead of your own life? What makes you go against most of the people here?
User_a4a8ef: I genuinely wonder: does your staunch pro-life stance also apply to people in Gaza since your camp seems so unconcerned by it. I'm curious how you approach to that instance of government not exercising its legitimate role in protecting highest of inalienable rights of 2 million people
User_a4a8ef: you of course might disagree with the majority of libertarians/conservatives on this and I'd love to see that happen but I have a feeling that an exceptionalism is very present among people who are so pro-life but also so pro-youknowwho entity
User_11d9d9: So that you can relate to how I see it, to me abortion is an attack to the infinite dignity of the human person as absurdly evil as infanticide.

Would you be concerned with parents throwing new borns out of a cliff?

Today, in the 21st century, the idea is absurd. But that was common practice centuries back in some places. It was evil then and it would be evil now.

I see abortion in the same lenses.

Does that answer the question, Atahan?
User_c7fdd7: how do you all have this much free time, very impressive tbh
User_11d9d9: I am concerned about what is going in Gaza, and I hope the bloodshed ends as soon as possible.
User_8e115b: Were you ever on the left side? I personally sorta switched sides on a lot of issues somewhat recently so im wondering about that
User_921ddc: Could you share what in your views is the appropriate punishment for abortion? Because I assume in your views it should be illegal?
User_a4a8ef: Your wording even now doesn't sound half as passionate as when you're arguing against abortion but I'll optimistically assume this is to protect visa status and not out of weak will .d
User_2d7394: I appreciate the sentiment but you do realize that what’s happening in Gaza, rather than being religious or ethnic in origin, is a bi-product of the economic and political beliefs you’re advocating for right?
User_52ac9c: Which brings us to the question, what makes us human?
A fetus before 24 weeks of gestation is not even capable of feeling pain or sensations, and there's no scientific evidence of conscious awareness before this mark.
Most people agree that consciousness is one of the main things that make humans, humans. And even if we considered the fetus a human, without consciousness we don't even consider someone "alive" to begin with - that's the same reason why families of people who had cerebral death and are in vegetative state have the option to turn off their life support, because permanent lack of consciousness means the person is not alive. You cannot kill what is not living, therefore abortion is not "feticide" or killing, since the fetus would not be considered alive to begin with
User_6c7187: in Palestine, Gaza city, it's not only the right to life being violated. it's the right to speak, because their voices are silenced, and who gives them voice is killed. it's the right to citizenship, because for all practical effects Palestinian citizens are under Israel control, but aren't allowed ANY right in that country. it's the right of movement, because Palestinians can't move outside of their designated areas under risk of being killed. it's their right to pursue happiness, because their hobbies, religions, and work are taken away each day, systematically. it's their right to food, because Israelis and Israel Army are destroying their food supplies, poisoning their trees, impeding aid. it's their right to shelter, because Israeli settlers and Israeli army are displacing them to occupy their homes. it's their right to dignity, because not only are Palestinians raped daily, but Israelis protested fiercely for their rights to rape Palestinians.

this is just one example of an issue WAY MORE IMPORTANT and pressing than abortion, which anyone that calls themselves pro-life and pro the freedoms of people as human beings should concern themselves with way before thinking about abortion. I believe you are extremely hypocritical, and use morality as a weapon.
User_da8a35: [name] a really good video about abortion that elena mentioned previously: https://youtu.be/c2PAajlHbnU?feature=shared

It starts with a premise (just for that video) of a fetus being a human being from day zero and explores the topic from that perspective
User_11d9d9: Well that's an interesting question.

I'd say economically I probably always leaned towards a sense of economic liberty, perhaps because I am from Latin America and think very critically of disasters like Cuba and Venezuela. After more study of economics, development case studies, and reflection on liberty, I definitely lean pro free markets since much younger.

The big irony is that on abortion I used to hold the pro-choice position as a teenager for a couple of years, then for many years I just wasn't sure. It's a painful question because indeed one must be concerned for the well-being of the mother. But justice matters, not just empathy (that is, both matter). In the end, what did it for me was not placing the right to liberty at the same level of the right to life (I believe Life comes first, liberty later), and coming to a new understanding and emphasis of the infinite dignity of the human person. I think those 2 premises are essential. People are dismissive of human fetuses (some people in the other group were comparing them to animals which is just ridiculous), and many people don't face the question head on of whether rights in conflict don't have a hierarchy, but I believe they do.
User_6c7187: I recommend you read each one of these claims and search it up for yourself. there's things i haven't mentioned because it's almost 3 am and I can't remember much, but I feel deeply in my heart I can't let the community of Minerva, which I care so deeply about, to become unsafe because people are arguing against the rights of its members in favor of their supposed higher morals.
User_11d9d9: I don't know for sure. I would decentralize it as much as possible, but the baseline is that the public policy should be pro-life.

I would probably fear centralization because that could lead to inflexible draconian measures.

Decentralization maximizes flexibility and optimization over the long term on most broadly accepted measures by the public, I would hope.
User_a4a8ef: give "kicking away the ladder" book a chance I'd say. it shows very effectively how the development miracles we attribute to free markets are in fact outcomes of state-led efforts that were later marketed as or switched into liberal market economics. it's a chicken or the egg question but this one has a much easier answer:)
User_6c7187: goated answer, because I'm so tired of that argument pro free market when in practice free market never seems to hold up!! it just becomes monopolies on every instance unless the government intervenes
User_6c7187: also you should learn as a fellow Latin American, Jose, that both Cuba and Venezuela fell economically specifically because of the US intervening.
User_a4a8ef: more than that, the developed "free-market" economies adopted their liberal measures only after already having developed. if you look at when the UK or the US really broke through to become global powers, they correspond to periods of heavy government interference in economics. only after already obtaining the position of power they become overtly capitalistic and advocate for it abroad as well bcs when the weak economy opens up to the capitalist system, it only benefits the big sharks and not the newbie
User_11d9d9: This is not the issue—the tragedy I would say—where I need to convince you or most people here.
User_6c7187: couldn't have put it better... this is precise!!
User_11d9d9: I probably don't agree.
User_6c7187: it's in the interest of the US that Latin American countries shift from their own resolutions into liberal democracy pursuing "free market" because they were the ones providing all the services needed to establish that, including the money, which would later prove to be a trap of debt!
User_a4a8ef: well you need to convince us because an overwhelming majority of self identified conservatives and libertarians happen to be so pro-life about abortion but also absolute apologists of massacring civilians. So one naturally wonders...
User_8e115b: So its the same "life before liberty" argument, just with the definition of "human" changing. Nice perspective actually when you put it that way

It also changes the weight of life and liberty thought. Because we give away comforts all the time because of lives of other people. At what points its too much? Why pregnancy is acceptable to save a life but not mandatory blood donations?
User_11d9d9: Foeticide (or feticide) is the act of killing a human fetus.

Foeticide derives from two constituent Latin roots. Foetus is related to "child" actually in a broader sense. The suffix -cide, from caedere, means "to cut down, to kill." It's similar to the etymology of homicide, genocide, infanticide, matricide, and regicide.

Lastly, let me add that it's also a question of human worth. You may agree it's not conscious among other things, but I want to ask you: do you agree it has moral value? A little moral value, a lot of moral value? No value at all? What is your answer?

Because if you acknowledge that it has even some moral value because it will grow into a unique and unrepeatable person, capable of smiling, laughing, loving, and living, then you must face head-on the question of how much moral value it has, if any?

I say infinite dignity.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foeticide
User_a4a8ef: as soon as colonizer spaniards were driven out of the newly independent latin american nations, britain replaced their economic dominance through softer but similarly harmful ways. British companies backed by their own government penetrated the continent so much that the political freedom was not accompanied by financial freedom at all, hence the first also fails. Argentina is one of the most stark examples but similar patterns emerge elsewhere. Also see the tristate war as an example of when the nation didn't cooperate, spoiler alert: it's pretty bad
User_8e115b: How much discomfort to you is acceptable? How much each life is worth?

Immigration causes discomfort too, but is the lives of citizens more important than the lives of immigrants having to live lesser lives in their home country?

So many questions
User_6c7187: you don't agree that imperialism promoted by the expansion of free market ideology from the US is what supports Israel in its genocide? because idk if you know but most of the aid towards Israel is not money, but instead guns, supplies, and etc. the US has done this for many other places and is doing so now, they are supplying Israel with what it needs to be a strong militaristic potency, and it does so in the interest of money - they want a chokehold over the oil that the middle east has, they want control over the area to facilitate trading from one ocean to another, among other economic interests of the US in keeping Israel the way it is and fomenting its demented sick ways.
User_8e115b: If a fetus get human rights right after being born, why not make immigrants get citizen rights right after becoming a citizen?
User_11d9d9: You point correctly that something that is out of the conversation is the fact that people can't even leave.

That's wrong and connects to freedom of movement, which I already acknowledged I believe in.

I want the bloodshed to end as soon as possible, and ideally I wouldn't want people to have to leave. But if people decide to leave because they are being bombed, they should be able to, and right now they are not by either Israel or Egypt, and that's terrible.
User_11d9d9: I don't understand this.
User_6c7187: and they also have the rights to their country, their land, their culture, which is erased every day. people in Palestine are having each and every one of these rights violated, and libertarian and conservative discourse dismisses this. if you care about the moral standard of your movement, you should bring these issues first, and others second.
User_c7fdd7: it shows
User_6c7187: I am willing to bet that your discussion of pro-life and the way you argued about it from such a cold, unrepresentative of reality perspective, has caused women in this community to feel more endangered, and that is the fact I am lamenting.
User_bcbd83: Tbh at first i was very surprised and frustrated but at the end together with the DNA response, i think respectfully we just wasted a lot of time
User_11d9d9: I'll most likely don't end up agreeing with you.

The left hasn't fared well on economics.

20st century, the left used to believe in central planning. No one believes in that today, it was a disaster.

In Latin America, the economic debacles are very well documented.

Hard to make the jump from poor to rich without a lot of economic growth, and very hard to do it with the public ownership of the means of production.

You may argue for some level of government intervention, but again, it's a longer conversation.

You are all familiar with a very prosperous country, the United States. If a system is similar enough, I tend to approve it.

Perhaps we should mention specific case studies, happy to give them.
User_a4a8ef: the US became so liberal only after they were already a world power is what I'm saying. there is no free market miracle here because it wasn't a feee market when it rose to dominance. they were super keen on protecting their home grown industry over global competition as well as disarming other nations of their industries to grow them dependent on the US production. you dont do that in board meetings with CEOs but with the biggest military industrial complex the world has ever witnessed by far:)
User_6c7187: I'd be very eager to discuss this point but I think I'd stay up till 4 for nothing of value to be achieved so
User_a4a8ef: I wonder if free market capitalism is so self-evidently efficient why did it take the US a century of trying to crush every alternative that was trying to flourish
User_6c7187: I retire myself from this conversation and I wish you realize you're a hypocritical prick
User_11d9d9: My goodness.

Terrible take.

Can't Cuba and Venezuela do trade with anyone else other than the US.

So the free market doesn't work, except when Cuba and Venezuela can't do free trade with Americans? Is that your take?

Cuba and Venezuela are definitely far left disasters, even Bernie Sanders and AOC would agree.

The fact that you are so fixated in blaming the US for all problems reveals a lot about your unwillingness to even critically assess some of the most terrible economic systems ever.

Fidel Castro used to outlaw most of private enterprise, Chavez expropriated aggressively. It fared terribly, and economic theory wouldn't have predicted it any differently but they were ideologues who cared little and destroyed their countries.
User_52ac9c: Bananacide is the act of killing a vegetal banana. Giving it a definition doesn't make the word real or representative of something in real life
User_11d9d9: I mean, if we agree that whatever the US and UK have done in their economic system is much better than what Cuba and Venezuela have tried out, then that's some common ground forward in this chat.

Because it's like night and day in terms of economic systems that work and don't work, even if we don't agree on the balance of free market vs. government intervention in the US and UK.
User_6c7187: literally the first point you make here is wrong because the US embargo is of course not only for their direct trades but any country that would trade with them would have bad relationships with the most powerful country in the world.
User_a4a8ef: this is not new, check Hobsbawm's chapter on industrial revolution. British early industrialists lobbied against their tradesman counterparts, convincing the imperial government to shut down the textile production in India and instead forcing the locals there to buy British produce coming out of their new factories. It's not a bunch of indian economic actors rationally deciding british cotton products were better, it's britain ARMY forcing them with the tip of the barrel to stop and buy from their people
User_52ac9c: If the condition for having moral value is being able to grow into a human person, I assume you also believe that sperm has moral value?
User_6c7187: Cuba managed to fare very well on a lot of measures: from a country with a dictatorship that made it into a rich people paradise, into a country with 98% literacy, free education with some of the best doctors on earth, got much more productive on crops, among other measures I could mention.
User_a4a8ef: no cuba and venezuela can't do trade with anyone else because any country or company that do that instantly gets sanctioned by the entire west. there are entire companies in the US that investigate such supply chains to punish the entities that dare doing business w such countries
User_6c7187: please 🙏  get out of your echo chamber.
User_11d9d9: Can you explain [handle] ?
User_6c7187: it's impossible to say that 98% literacy rate was a disaster
User_6c7187: communism developed Cuba, plain and simple. Venezuela is a more difficult case and I am less educated on it to discuss it.
User_11d9d9: I probably shouldn't even answer to you, Alen. You just keep the mockery and derision. I am not making the community dangerous to anyone, so no, I don't understand it.
User_11d9d9: In the end of the day observational data is different than cause and effect.

We want to establish we public policies lead to prosperity and are right ethically as well.

So it's not as simple as X country is Y and achieved Z so therefore there is a causal relationship, correlation is not causation.

It's a longer conversation, I doubt we'll solve it here.

But generally, to convey to you my position, I do lean towards more economic liberty, but in the ethical sense (it has a lot to do with individual rights), and the economics sense (I believe it leads to prosperity as well).

But even free markets is a broad term, are we talking minimum wages? free trade? etc?
User_a4a8ef: in fact multiple UN resolutions with dozens of nations' signature to remove the economic blockade on cuba were vetoed by the US and few of its key allies
User_52ac9c: So true, and US has the power to sanction whichever country they want, which is very unfair. This is because almost all international trade is made in US dollars, putting all the power into a single country. In fact, the US government usually does everything they can to harm countries or groups who simply don't wanna trade in USD (since this is putting "at risk" their global dominantion (basically) of economy and global trade). Just like the recent events of Trump being pissed off with the BRICS just because we wanna have our own trading currency among ourselves, and said that he would tariff any country who does that, and he did tariff plus put migration obstacles for students and visitors such as increased fees for visa applications for Brazil, India, among other countries. US government, as always historically, being unfair and bully
User_bcbd83: After reading through your answers I don’t believe you have enough knowledge about what is actually happening in abortion(biologically) and your arguments overall are inconsistent and not sound. 
So i am not frustrated about your opinions anymore
User_11d9d9: Guys, countries can choose their own economic systems. I am from Guatemala, there is no short amount of terrible policies chosen by Guatemalans.

There have been economic successes, Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea, Ireland, Chile, many of which perhaps cater to your taste in some level of government intervention.

But this insistence by the left that most of the world's countries economic failures are the US fault, just doesn't stand to scrutiny.

Latin America has plenty of example of terrible economic policy.

Pick an estimate, is the failure of Latin America mostly because of Latam, or would you blame the US?

Gotta take responsibility of bad policy even if the US has meddled in the region.
User_11d9d9: My argument was explained clearly in a few comments, the DNA tangent is unnecessary if we agree on certain basic premises like acknowledging that abortion is an attack against the infinite dignity of the human person. The DNA tangent was only necessary when questioned what makes a fetus unique and unrepeatable. Do you believe it was an inappropriate answer? You don't agree a fetus is unique and unrepeatable [handle]?
User_a4a8ef: The economic toll of plan condor alone costed Argentina, Chile, Brazil, Uruguay, etc. YEAAAARS of economic development. The U.S.' war on drugs set back Mexico and Colombia for decades, expanding the problem instead of solving anything. They're now messing with Panama. They've historically supported the brutal military dictatorship in your country also. Their attempt at invading Nicaragua pushed the country on the lap of reactionary authoritarian left. Their economic chokehold on venezuela and cuba is starving millions. want me to keep going?
User_a4a8ef: Iranians tried choosing their own economic policies under Mosaddeq, nationalized oil industry and said no more British colonial hold over my home resources. Well, wanna know the cost of that "self-decision"? Mosaddeq was overthrown in a joint coup organized by CIA and MI6 (100% proven and admitted by these agencies themselves) setting the country on a course that has led to today's Islamic republic
User_a4a8ef: I thought they could choose their own policies? Turns out when they try, the leader gets overthrown at the hand of spies (and not free market companies) until the country aligns itself w the status quo
User_52ac9c: Well, Singapore, Taiwan, and south korea (idk about the other two) are all partners with the US. Try not being one to see if you will be able to succeed economically in this globe.

To simplify, think like this way:

Every person has a sticker production. I have my own sticker, which is blue and has a beautiful image of a dolphin in it. You also have ur sticker, other ppl also have their own sticker.

Now, we decided that we will trade stickers in exchange for goods and services from each other. But, oh well, looks like my sticker is chosen as the best sticker of all - so everyone has to exchange only my stickers.

Boom, all the trade is made with blue stickers with dolphin images.

But, here's the catch: im the only one who produces such stickers, and I don't like Fulaninho Da Silva Sato. Therefore, I'll sanction Fulaninho da Silva Sato and won't let him access my stickers. Oh no! Now he can't purchase anything from anyone, because we built the system around my stickers and everyone uses them, so I can do whatever I want. If you speak against me, I wont let u access my stickers too, and you wont be able to trade with anyone. If someone trades with you, Ill sanction them too.

In case you couldn't guess, Fulaninho da Silva Sato is poor now and could never get out of poverty. What a surprise, no?
But ofc, it's absolutely and solely his fault that he failed economically
User_9fdc87: That’s the whole point, for your argument for being pro life, you have to BELIEVE that abortion is murder and if that’s what you BELIEVE, there is really no way we can change your opinion. Yk any libertarian will agree that it is my freedom to choose whatever I do with my body and the government has no right to dictate me what is allowed or not. So, that’s an individual choice one has to make, so really not a discussion for us to have. Just like the constitution can’t tell me not to drink beer, it can’t tell me what I’m not allowed to do (ofc given that I believe that abortion is not a murder)
User_11d9d9: I just to establish a few things.

Emin, what is your stance on Cuba and Venezuela?

I need to understand that.

I was reading through the messages and I am not clear on that.

I want to find common ground.

Do you agree the economic systems they implemented are terrible?
User_a4a8ef: I agree that Venezuelan economy today is terrible, largely attributable to Maduro and its besties sucking up the country's resources under leftist guise with little fucks given to actual public. I also agree Cuba is doing pretty bad but actually much better than what another nation facing similar sanctions could experience. Neither of these are independent choices of these nations though as their economic systems heavily depend on foreign interventions especially sanctions
User_11d9d9: Hi Nastya,

There is really no way you can change my opinion as long as I believe that abortion is murder. That is true. That's why it's a breaking point.

You said that any libertarian will agree, but you interned at Cato, and probably even there it was 50%/50%. The label is not the content in the end, it's a descriptor, and for abortion it's not an effective one because the libertarian camp is divided on the question.
User_11d9d9: Chavez, do you agree that Chavez ideas were terrible?
User_a4a8ef: I align with many, certainly not all
User_c7fdd7: can you acknowledge then that you entire stance on this topic is based on a arbitrary dogma you take as an axiom?
User_11d9d9: Which ones?
User_a4a8ef: Also mind you Colombia and Ecuador being a pro-US capitalist right wing nations for many decades didn't yield much brighter results either, so the regional overall issues also persist apart from policy-specific ones
User_9fdc87: Well I don’t really have the data but one summer ago I did my fair share of work with public opinion at Cato and will say that the topic is less divided than u think and also much less pressing. I also know a lot of people who are self proclaimed libertarians who hate being mixed with conservatives (and therefore think trump speaking in front of libertarian party was a joke, just like the party itself), and I know some conservatives and liberals who can’t get jobs at heritage or brookings so they become libertarian too lol. It’s a forest of all possible opinions
User_a4a8ef: nationalizing critical industries including oil to end foreign control over their key resources and services. massive investments in social welfare programs and infrastructure aimed to end poverty (largely successful especially in the earlier years)
User_a4a8ef: on the other hand I don't like the centralization of political and legal powers during his time as well as media oppression
User_11d9d9: I already stated certain premises

1) Life is the highest of all unalienable rights
2) The government has a legitimate role in protecting that right
3) Abortion is an attack to the infinite dignity of the human person
4) One cannot have liberty without life. The right to life comes first.
5) At some point I added that parents have a direct relationship, and implied responsibility, for their children

Along those lines I reach the conclusion I do. If we don't agree on the premises and first principles, we won't reach the same conclusion.

You want to call dogma the above, go ahead. Some will be persuaded to agree with the premises. At some point we have to appeal to first principles, you can dissect them, but if we disagree, I hope we can at least identify the breaking points.

The most obvious one: Not agreeing that abortion is an attack to the infinite dignity of the human person.
User_bcbd83: Aaaaaa
User_a4a8ef: MDJDJJDSJDNDNF
User_11d9d9: But inside of Cato? I would have said it was 50%/50%. I shared my views with scholars and that's what they said, perhaps out of kindness but it's not like Cato is hostile to pro-life libertarians.

Trump is a disgrace to conservatives: https://www.cato.org/blog/conservatives-lone-libertarian-take-donald-trump

I don't like Trump.
User_c7fdd7: respectfully, I still think you should go touch grass
User_11d9d9: Nationalizing much of the econony is the traditional textbook socialist disaster https://youtu.be/X-zfD5SKeVQ?si=NQnwPeEeSEY5-rDJ

Do you speak Spanish? This is a video of Chavez expropriating businesses

The defense of free markets is also ethical 

What happened in Venezuela was economically senseless, but also ethically wrong

Do we agree what Chavez did here was wrong?
User_9fdc87: I haven’t discussed the topic with many scholars, I know Deidre McCloskey is pro choice

I also know that Cato is not the prime/encyclopedia of libertarianism.

Don’t get me wrong, I loved my internship, it was an enriching experience, loved my team, and I learned so so much, but I also understood the general skepticism towards think tanks and policy work
User_17f6b8: Where does the unalienable right come from? Why does it apply only to humans? This argument is formalized in the western tradition under christian theology. The government's role in defending them? Sounds a lot like a divine right to rule. And infinite dignity?

I don't know, it sounds a like a very christian argument trying to pass for an universal, nonreligious stance.
User_11d9d9: Year 2022

It's not that important

I don't choose to square my views within a label

I am Pro-Life, that is a conservative view. I hold it.

I align with Cato on immigration. That is a more libertarian view. I hold it.

Both are contentious issues across both camps, actually.
User_a4a8ef: Nationalizing much of the economy is different than nationalizing energy, communications, and transportation aka critical industries. Letting multinational corporations suck up your natural resources over your own government is the real disaster, non-socialist african nations are already suffering from this for example
User_a4a8ef: yes I do speak Spanish, the video sounds tragic though without knowing the exact rationale behind emptying the building (for example in Turkey some businesses bribed previous governments into illegally developing publicly owned land so occasionally they get demolished etc.) I cant call it objectively right or wrong. If this was done nonsensically, yes why would I support
User_11d9d9: We have to acknowledge the root clash.

I am standing in the natural law tradition (rights and dignity are real, objective, and discoverable).

You're standing in a relativist or positivist frame (rights exist only if we make them up or vote them in).

That’s why this feels like endless pressing — the worldviews don’t share the same foundation.

--- Conversation 20 (2025-09-19) ---
User_a4a8ef: 🙂‍↔️
User_a11b3c: the obsession with Venezuela here can pretty much outdo Miss Universe lol
User_6c7187: nationalizing critical resources is common for a lot of countries, even the US does it. its just a way to keep the power of these resources under government control, so they can either regulate prices, guarantee they are accessible, or control the flow of production. your argument is just: "this thing is bad. it's so bad. this is so so bad. and what I defend is good. very ethical. do you agree?"
User_11d9d9: You are literally replying to a video of Chavez.

I honestly doubt you are familiar to the extent that Venezuela pushed the socialist idea of centralizing the means of production.

If you like the US system, great, we found commong ground. Me too!
User_6c7187: i dont particularly like the US System, I just believe that centralizing means of production is a good thing and if the government deems it important and has the power and planning to centralize a lot of the economy (for example, like China is able to), that is not a bad thing and will lead to economic development.
User_11d9d9: Venezuela's Playbook: The Communist Manifesto | Cato Institute https://share.google/bG5JgPv7xUbWy6aqA
User_11d9d9: Tbh, I don't know why I keep engaging.

Yesterday you called me a "hypocritical prick". It's an outright insult.

This is just exhausting and lacks good faith and respect.

I am done for now. The issue is not that we disagree but that this is just toxic.

I need to tune out.
User_c7fdd7: .
User_11d9d9: You are a bully, Alen.
User_3751e6: at least he is a funny bully 😁
User_11d9d9: You realize you are behaving like one as well?

Like you seem to enjoy it don't you?

I don't know what's wrong with younger classmen that they can't seem to be able to have civil open debate of ideas. College students should seek to challenge ideas, but this is the opposite of that.
User_17f6b8: Just want to add that libertarian socialism (aka anarchism) exists, is alive an well, firmly against authoritarian centralization. And about Venezuela being communist. The communes are not recognized constitutionally and exist in a tense relationship with the central government.
User_17f6b8: Venezuela is such a special case because it's a petro economy, a naturally centralizing resource. It needs to be in the hands of government or big corporations.

--- Conversation 21 (2025-09-19) ---
User_873098: I'm curious to learn more about how inalienable rights can be placed into a hierarchy. Can people or governments choose to fight (fight means have people be killed) to protect some rights related to freedom/liberty? I'm imagining a classic good vs evil battle where the good guys die for protecting individual liberty and the bad guys want everyone to be a slave. This appears to be a case where someone who values life above all else would say that the good guys should give up their freedoms because otherwise they would die
User_873098: Legislative and judicial systems around the world are hugely complex social systems that are built to handle cases where rights of voters/ plaintiffs/special interests like corporations, lobbying groups etc are placed in conflict with each other. In the US until a few years ago the right to an abortion was actually based on a long series of precedents around a right to privacy and the special relationship between a person and their doctor. Even in a country (the US) that proclaims a belief in inalienable God given rights, and consistently recognizes some rights are more important than others (eg right to freedom of speech more important than a right to not be discriminated against - see masterpiece cakeshop supreme court case) it also recognizes that different levels of scrutiny need to be applied depending on who is involved for the exact same right. 
Context matters when applying rights to complex situations (see strict vs intermediate scrutiny). Personally, I think one should take at least a somewhat consequentialist approach to considering the type of world where women are not able to make decisions at their health and whether that is one that would actually be fun to live in rather than framing it as a matter of Pure Deductive Truth
User_11d9d9: Without the right to life, no other right can exist.

You are making a categorical mistake.

A slave cannot have liberty if they don't have a right to life first, but they should have both. I am sure we agree.

Self-sacrifice, at any rate, does not equal devaluing life. This is the categorical mistake you are making.

You shouldn't kill people though, war is always evil. I hope we agree that everything should be done to prevent it, just like abortion is evil and everything that can be done to prevent it should be done.

That one is not a complicated premise, that the right to life is the highest of all inalienable rights.

The endless pressing in this group is rooted in a relativist worldview where rights are whatever we vote them to be. I believe in natural law, a different worldview.

But my worldview presents a solid foundation for human dignity, including a foundation for the abolition of slavery. Natural law was actually the worldview of the radical abolitionists in the US in the 1850s and 1860s.

So I turn back the question to all of you over here, what is your foundation for human dignity? You don't have a good one—will never have it—because everything for you is constructed.

At least, that seems to be the prevailing worldview in the chat. People have said things along the lines of "“Why humans? Why rights? Why dignity at all?"

The root clash is evident, and it is good we can identify it.
User_11d9d9: What is true and good is independent of what the law says.

The law used to say that slavery was okay. That was fixed with the 13th amendment.

Courts used to say that black people couldn't be citizens and enjoy the equal protection of the laws. That was fixed with the 14th amendment.

Laws used to say black people couldn't vote. That was fixef with the 15th amendment.

Let me quote John Bingham:

“Representatives, to you I appeal, that hereafter, by your act and the approval of the loyal people of this country, every man in every State of the Union, in accordance with the written words of your Constitution, may, by the national law, be secured in the equal protection of his personal rights. Your Constitution provides that no man, no matter what his color, no matter beneath what sky he may have been born, no matter in what disastrous conflict or by what tyrannical hand his liberty may have been cloven down, no matter how poor, no matter how friendless, no matter how ignorant, shall be deprived of life or liberty or property without due process of law—law in its highest sense, that law which is the perfection of human reason, and which is impartial, equal, exact justice; that justice which requires that every man shall have his right; that justice which is the highest duty of nations as it is the imperishable attribute of the God of nations.”  
— One country, one Constitution, and one people. Speech of Hon. John A. Bingham, of Ohio, in the House of Representatives, February 28, 1866, in support of the proposed amendment to enforce the bill of rights.
User_873098: I agree morality != Law! But laws are interesting to look at because they are an attempt to make ideals (that are often in conflict) practical. 

While I agree that some life needs to exist for rights to make sense, I don't think it is necessary to make a rigid hierarchy of rights independent of context, and many people throughout history have often said variations on life is not worth living if it is not free. New Hampshire state motto "live free or die" is a great example of that https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Live_Free_or_Die
User_d09730: Well, as it pertains to attempting to come to conclusions on this question using the process of logic, I think we have swept over the strong contradiction of terms here.

Firstly, I just want to give you credit [name], for staying professional and not adhering to ad hominem, and for being willing to discuss with people whom you disagree with even though it's not comfortable. All things I hold to be very important for productive conversations, thank you.

I believe you are internally logically consistent, that is, given your premises I do think your conclusion follows. If terminating the typical progression of a fetus is equivalent to terminating the typical progression (life) of an adult human, then indeed abortion is murder and immoral. However, under my set of premises (my worldview), your conclusions would not follow, and vice versa of course. This is just to illustrate that we can produce arbitrary conclusions, given we can choose our set of premises. Logical arguments lose their meaning if the premises don't reflect reality. Hence, any logical critique would be forced to focus on the invalidity of the premises. By definition, there is no logical predecessor of a premise except belief, sometimes categorized as evidence, depending on your belief. Here is the issue, since our premises contradict each other, and neither are based in objective evidence (as there is no true objectivity to what life actually is), we will never be able to logically persuade each other. There is a fundamental contradiction of terms. Of course, a theist would perhaps disagree on the nonexistence of objectivity.

This is essentially just a long way of saying, both arguments almost completely rely on what we believe about when a human life is a human life (language forces me to imply it's a discrete event), and at which point it's a discussion about belief and not logic.

In one sense, that's obvious, in the end we have to agree to disagree. But it's also so easy to turn blind for this core difference in belief/premise and instead get the sensation that the other party is fallacious, deliberately evil, an opponent, brainwashed, or something similar. This is why I believe that the platform of "conservative vs liberal debates" is often more destructive than constructive, I think it promotes and nurtures the worst polarizing and antagonizing behavior in us (partly thanks to Jubilee, now increasingly normalized). I don't think such platforms are unproductive because we're unable to be civil, but because matters of belief are disguised as matters of logic. Something I think we're participating in right now.

There is also an issue with logical reasoning when one of the premises is a self-affirming claim of objectivity, "all my premises, including this one, are objective truth", implying "everything else is constructed" and seemingly hence hold less weight. Objectivity is a premise we all are able to claim, making it lose it's meaning as a premise.

You made the claim that our foundation for human dignity is constructed, and hence not as good. This is only true given your set of premises, which in this situation are (logically) equally valid as my premises, where your foundation for human dignity is constructed, and hence "not as good".

I'm not saying we can't make use of logical arguments, but we just shouldn't fall for the illusion of attaining objective logical truth when the real question at hand is about the validity of our premises, which do not relate to logic, but to belief.
User_d09730: With that said, I do think I have a logical bone to pick with the argument of "potential to life", that you admitted earlier.

To begin with, there are two different premises you could hold here. A fetus holds the moral status of a full human life because it holds the potential to become a full human, the 'potential to become' produces the status, this is the premise I understood you to take. A second premise is that a fetus just is equal to a human life, this premise skips the step of 'potential to become' and becomes as logically irrefutable as as any other premise.

Now, the claim I want to make is that the concept of potential is continuous and vague, but used in arguments as if it obviously a discrete event. I think this is very dualistic thinking that relies on a "common sense" derived from one specific culture of one specific time. In other words, the line drawn is an categorization that "makes sense" to a certain culture and or "is true" to a certain belief, but at it's core, outside of all human world-views, is arbitrary.

To illustrate both the vagueness of potential, and the ad hoc tendency of the argument relying on it, consider the following.

A couple is about to get their third kid, they get their kids by submitting sperm and an egg to an insemination lab that have a 100% success rate. The worker at the lab, just before inserting a selected sperm into the egg, chooses not to, discards the egg and the sperm and leaves. Is this equivalent to abortion? Clearly there was equivalently strong potential for life as if the egg had just been inseminated. Here, a common counterpoint would be some form of ad hoc, redefining the human life as not only potential, but also insemination. Or perhaps reverting to the second premise I described, where potential isn't even a part of the premise anymore.

What if the worker, just before insemination, suddenly goes back and changes the specific sperm from the sample to use for insemination (assume they're able to hold single specific sperm somehow), what happened to the potential of the first sperm? Is this another case of a unique and irreproducible potential for life being terminated? What if the sperm where indexed and randomly selected? Is there any way to select the sperm that doesn't terminate the potential of the others?

There are many such thought experiments one can produce, that shows that the concept of potential doesn't inherently start at insemination. I believe that if one stays true to the argument of potential, they would have to admit these scenarios as morally bad, I think it also logically follows that interrupting someone having unprotected penetrative sex would be morally bad, as it may very well terminate a potential, unique and irreproducible, life. If it's truly about the potential for human life, it's an act of immorality of us all, at this very moment (unless someone is having a good time rn), to not be actively producing children. I realize you would either call this a slippery slope, or claim that it does not follow from the argument of potential, to which I would say that you would likely need some ad hoc redefinition of terms to make that true. At least in my experience with arguments like this, that's what commonly is done.

Now this argument doesn't produce a correct line to draw in the process, but simply highlights that we reach absurd situations when claiming objectivity in that life potential is a discrete event, rather than a continuous unfolding.
User_d09730: I also feel like I have to note that, I am, we are, speaking about this issue as biological males. At least for myself I have never and will never have any practical experience, and hence no true understanding, of the matter in question, abortion. Hence, I think, that I'm inherently unfit to even speak to this topic as it pertains to policy, what is, or what ought. For that reason I tried to stay as much as I could in the realm of logical arguments.
User_11d9d9: To debate each other effectively, we have to understand each other's arguments, and there is a key mistake here. You misunderstood my argument.

I didn't make the claim that "your foundation for human dignity is constructed, and hence not as good". I made the claim that under your worldview, everything is constructed. You are the relativist (and honestly everyone here), as it shows everywhere in your message. 

In a way, I cannot engage yet (I'd love to) with your foundation for human dignity because you dodged the question (as everyone here) completely: you didn't provide one.

Thus, again, I'll try to point what the root clash is:

- I am standing in the natural law tradition (rights and dignity are real, objective, and discoverable).

- You're standing in a relativist frame (rights exist only if we make them up or vote them in). That’s why this feels like infinite pressing on the most basic premises, getting even to the embarrassing point of comparing cells in a person's mouth with a zygote.

But even then, if I follow the relativist trap, the biology is still actually on my side. Mouth cells vs. embryo → somatic repair tissue vs. self-directed organismal development. Different end, do different telos. But again the trap people want me to fall into is "you're not an expert in biology, you don't know what you're talking about". My proposition anyways is that from conception forward, we’re talking about the same human being developing. There’s no breakpoint where humanity suddenly begins.

However, you must notice what’s happening — I’m asked to answer each biological question, but none of them actually change the core fact: we’re talking about one continuous human life. Every other line people proposed — viability, consciousness, pain — is a value judgment about when you’re willing to recognize dignity. That’s not biology anymore anyways, that actually drives it back moral philosophy again. Great. My position as I have stated and paraphrased multiple times is that being human is enough.

If I chase you into the rabbit hole, I will end up in a void — nothing can be proved, nothing can be true.
If I stand my ground, I'll look “rigid” to the crowd — but I'll also be the only one still pointing at bedrock.

That’s often the role of someone who actually believes liberty or dignity has an objective foundation: I don’t win claps, I witness to truth.

If I follow you or the relativist worldview all the way down, every claim becomes “just belief.” At that point:

Murder is “wrong” only because society says so.

Human rights are “constructed” fictions.

Even the claim “all is belief” is just another belief.

That’s why it feels infinite — it dissolves not only my argument but your own ground too. It’s a self-eroding position and you should admit that. You already did in a way with other words.

All of this summarizes into one question: If you reject natural rights, what grounds your own view on dignity? Don't dodge the question.
User_45b134: It's so interesting to me that you call other people bullies but so far your only position is "I'm right you're wrong" and ask for respect in debate when in this post above you just called someone else's point embarrassing. 
Which is actually exactly what I expect from the kind of group you're trying to create which has nothing to do with debate or structured conversation, just as an outlet for you to feel better than everyone else
User_45b134: this has been fascinating to watch though and for the most part I'm proud of our Minerva community
User_d09730: I'm sorry that I misunderstood your claim, the quoted part is what I interpreted as "constructed" implying not as good.
User_d09730: I agree with this claim, I don't think there's any objective or obvious step where human life begins, including conception.
User_d09730: When I spoke about belief, I was also referring to religious belief. Even though you believe that your foundation is objective, that is still a belief.
User_d09730: I didn't intend to ask you any questions of biology, I asked questions of morality in the situation of the parents trying to get another child.
User_11d9d9: I mean to say rights are real, objective, and discoverable, not decided by society, subjetive, and constructed.

That's what I mean when I say: Under the relativist worldview, everything is constructed.

Does thst clarify it?
User_d09730: My beliefs ground my view on dignity, just like your beliefs ground your views. Would it be more valid for you if I referred to those beliefs as objective truth? Because I certainly could make that claim.
User_d09730: And why does it matter whether it's constructed or not? Do you also mean that those who claim objectivity are logically more correct? If so, that feels a bit circular.
User_11d9d9: Not really, the embryo is biologically human from conception (species identity isn’t in dispute).

The moral question is: does biological humanness entail dignity and protection?

That’s the hinge. No amount of rabbit-holing in cell biology changes that dignity claim.
User_d09730: Well, we all agree that human life deserves dignity, the question is what is to be considered a human life.
User_d09730: So then there is a breakpoint where humanity suddenly begins?
User_11d9d9: Again you drive it back to my religion, but the point is larger than that.

I keep mentioning natural law, which is not the same as Catholicism.

But again, the point against relativism is larger than that, much larger.

We can frame it like this:

If objectivity doesn’t exist, that statement itself cannot claim to be objectively true. But if it is objectively true, then objectivity does exist, and we’re back to asking: what’s the true foundation of dignity?

You may disagree with my religion or anyone's religion, natural law, my worldview, but if we at least walked into objectivity and not relativism, that would be a step forward, but I doubt we'll get there.

Can we agree there is a truth we can strive to find even if we disagree what that truth is, or will you insist everyone has their own truth?
User_17f6b8: So, to help understand your argument, what is a right?
User_d09730: There is no issue with the non-existence of objectivity, except the one you produce for yourself.

In my view morality is as human-made as language, so there is as little objectivity to moral positions as there is in how to pronounce a given word. You would be willing to admit the absence of objectivity in such human-made fields, like language or what is beautiful. There is no contradiction there because we in those instances agree, or I think we do, that they're made up by humans.

Our disagreement comes from whether morality is made by humans, or something that exists outside of humans. Once again, we come to belief, as you would have to admit it's possible to validly believe either thing. Just as I could choose to believe that beauty is not produced by humans, but an objective feature.
User_11d9d9: This finally reveals that relativism is empty on the question. And that's a problem, a dangerous one.

If dignity is only belief, it collapses into preference; history shows that when rights are just opinion, it collapses into will-to-power. If there’s no truth, then whoever has the votes or the guns decides what “dignity” is. That’s not a foundation, that’s force.

Relativists smuggle in what they deny. We all know deep down that rights can’t rest on pure opinion.
User_11d9d9: I claim there is objectivity, right and wrong, not just "your truth and my truth so live and let live on the question of abortion".
User_873098: to me it feels self evident that morality is an emergency property of complex biological systems with interacting parts. If we had different DNA, we would have different moral codes. I'm curious what you think of this?
User_11d9d9: Humanity doesn’t suddenly begin at some breakpoint — it begins at conception and develops continuously. Every other line in history has been arbitrary, reaching as far as infanticide not many centuries ago in many places, and always used to strip dignity from the vulnerable.
User_11d9d9: There is.
User_11d9d9: But not in the sense you meant.
User_11d9d9: The start, conception, is self-evident. Whatever else, is arbitrary.
User_d09730: You're implying that objectivity/fundamentalism is inherently better than relativism, that relativism is dangerous because then anyone can do anything. Well, no matter what we think the truth is that anyone can in fact do anything, since we have free will and the power of independent opinion making and action. That is to say, no matter how much you enforce objective thinking, of which there has been a lot in history, you will still have all the issues you describe here.

I would also challenge the idea that objectivity is better than relativism as it implies nothing can be improved about the framework, history has shown us that we have had to change a lot about our moral beliefs. (slavery, gender equality, queer rights, etc). If we had held to objectivity being better than relativism, we would have never made the improvements that you cited earlier. Why do you agree to todays objectivity world-view, and not the one in 1870, or 1490? In a sense, you are also choosing, being relativistic, in which objectivity model to follow. Or you were lucky to believe in todays objectivity worldview, and not the future's or the past's.
User_ba4913: How do you say that a couple of cells is human, after conception, but that another random cell is not, this seems fallacious because if you define that these couple of cells is human because it will grow up to be a human (and the random saliva cell as not because it won't), then it seems you are still using the premise of 'potential to be human' as [handle] said, with all the fallacies entailed with it in his message about stating the conception point as when the humanity comes to being.
I disagree that it is self evident.
User_11d9d9: This! Yes! This is it! You couldn't have put it best.

Below you compare morality to language, you compare morality with what is subjectively beautiful in art, and I firmly disagree with it. I disagree with it with the core of my being.

In the important question of abortion, it reveals why you and many here unavoidably hold the "live and let live position".

And it's dangerous. Many here dehumanize the fetus.

Know that relativism is capable of dehumanizing people in other contexts.

Because for you, morality is as subjective as language, so live and let live.

Do persons have inalienable rights? I believe they do. But a majority votes otherwise, therefore they don't? It's as old as time, and always wrong.

You said:

"In my view morality is as human-made as language, so there is as little objectivity to moral positions as there is in how to pronounce a given word. You would be willing to admit the absence of objectivity in such human-made fields, like language or what is beautiful. There is no contradiction there because we in those instances agree, or I think we do, that they're made up by humans.

Our disagreement comes from whether morality is made by humans, or something that exists outside of humans. Once again, we come to belief, as you would have to admit it's possible to validly believe either thing. Just as I could choose to believe that beauty is not produced by humans, but an objective feature."
User_11d9d9: It's great that you mention slavery, but history helps me on that point.

Radical slavery abolitionists of the 1850s and 1860s appealed to Natural Law first principles.

Relativism would have totally failed to abolish slavery in the 19th century. The pieces of legislation that we owe such an achievement rest on Natural Law—rights are real, objective, and discoverable.

“Representatives, to you I appeal, that hereafter, by your act and the approval of the loyal people of this country, every man in every State of the Union, in accordance with the written words of your Constitution, may, by the national law, be secured in the equal protection of his personal rights. Your Constitution provides that no man, no matter what his color, no matter beneath what sky he may have been born, no matter in what disastrous conflict or by what tyrannical hand his liberty may have been cloven down, no matter how poor, no matter how friendless, no matter how ignorant, shall be deprived of life or liberty or property without due process of law—law in its highest sense, that law which is the perfection of human reason, and which is impartial, equal, exact justice; that justice which requires that every man shall have his right; that justice which is the highest duty of nations as it is the imperishable attribute of the God of nations.”  
— One country, one Constitution, and one people. Speech of Hon. John A. Bingham, of Ohio, in the House of Representatives, February 28, 1866, in support of the proposed amendment to enforce the bill of rights.
User_d09730: What do you mean with the "live and let live position"?

Both relativism, and objectivism (to give it a name), are both very very capable of dehumanizing and causing human suffering. I agree relativism is dangerous, but so its objectivism. History shows us horrors regardless of the position.

Even though one might be a relativist, they may still believe in inalienable rights, those are not opposites.
User_d09730: Well, both sides on this question would both follow natural law arguments, this just further shows that there can still be disagreement, change, and freedom of opinion and action, even if everyone is following a belief of an objective worldview.

I agree with you that there exists objectivists that have made good change, there also exists those who have done bad change. Similarly for those who don't hold on objectivism. This does not support the case for objectivism as a concept.
User_11d9d9: I actually already addressed that above and it boils down to this word, which I used.

Different end, different telos.

The fallacy you make is therefore fall equivalence.

But I also already argued against the problem of chasing the infinite relativist rabbit-hole. Where will it ever end? What would satisfy you? What is the one objection that if solved would convince you?
User_d09730: In fact, I would say that if you follow a relativist standpoint, you are by definition being open to being wrong, and to change. While someone following an objectivism standpoint is much more resistant to change. Ideological stubbornness and camp behavior is supported by objectivistic thought. You cannot improve your moral stance or change the social status quo, if everyone is objectivists and believe that their worldview is inherently irrefutable.
User_d09730: Things like the abolition of slavery and promotion of gender equality would not have happened if people did not challenge what the broad society found to be objective truths at the time.
User_11d9d9: "Live and let live position" = "there is no objective truth on the question of abortion, just subjective truth, therefore abortion can't be objectively wrong or right, just subjectively wrong or right, so live and let live"

Your equivalence move is simply wrong here:  “Objectivism can be wrong.” — Sure — but then the solution isn’t relativism, it’s finding the right objectivity. Otherwise you’re saying “truth claims are dangerous, therefore we should deny truth exists,” which is self-defeating.

You say “Both cause horrors.” But in my view history’s atrocities came from denying inherent dignity, whether by redefining humanity (slavery, eugenics) or by reducing it to preference (totalitarian relativism). The common denominator is abandoning natural law, not objectivity itself.

The confusion move is wrong too: You say "Relativists can still believe in inalienable rights.” That is a contradiction — a relativist would be smuggling in objectivity while denying it. It’s like saying, “I’m a relativist, but I believe in absolute truth.”
User_11d9d9: My answer here shall be the same as my answer in my last message.

“Objectivism can be wrong.” — Sure — but then the solution isn’t relativism, it’s finding the right objectivity.
User_ba4913: Thanks for the definition. Don't want to take this into biology again, but if we're talking about ultimate aims or objectives, don't the two cells separately also have the 'ultimate aim' (or telos as you say - thank you for improving my vocab btw), of 'organismal development' as they do together?
User_d09730: To this I would say that relativism is the pursuit of finding the right objectivity, except that you never settle, as you think it can always be improved. This being highlighted, it seems like the only difference between objectivism and relativism is that in objectivism we will eventually, at some point, just stop and decide that this is it. How would we be able to tell when that is?
User_ba4913: So you admit there can be wrong objectivities. Then how do we ascertain that the obectivity that you claim to be right is, in fact, the right one?
User_11d9d9: History again shows otherwise in very good ways.

We can appeal to inalienable rights to abolish slavery in the 19th century, end racial segregation in the 20th century (MLK Junior used natural law and even religious language https://youtu.be/vP4iY1TtS3s), and I dare say also defend immigrants and protect the unborn in the 21st century.

Because it is a matter of the first principles we agree on, and if we don't agree on them or are being contradictory, falling short of the ideals, we ought to debate hard to find them or fix the contradictions, and not just pretend that truth doesn't exist.
User_d09730: In your view this is denying inherent dignity, but note that people promoting slavery and eugenics would use very similar arguments of objectivity and respecting dignity. What would be to respect human dignity, according to a slaveowners objective worldview, would be to not let people of color be free as whites. Now in today's context humans of all ethnicities are obviously considered human, but that wasn't always the case, and they used arguments of natural law and objectivism. Today we don't consider AIs human, but in time we might be seen as not respecting the inherent dignity of intelligent agents.
User_d09730: When it comes to morality, when do you think the work to improve our understanding of whats right and wrong is done?
User_11d9d9: Those achievements wouldn't have happened if those generations had not believed there is a higher, universal, timeless truth that goes beyond people's opinions.

Rights are real, and they don't depend on people's opinions or what the majority—or the government—thinks. That's the most powerful first principle you can appeal to for changing the law—because it's correct.
User_11d9d9: No, the zygote -> embryo intrinsically is directed towards growing and developing in a matter of weeks and months. The cells in my mouth are not. They aren't seriously equivalent.
User_873098: stem cells?
User_11d9d9: No, relativism is that there is no truth. Objectivism is that there is a truth, even if we don't agree what the truth is.
User_d09730: There is no *objective truth to moral questions. Something not being objective doesn't mean it doesn't exist. Just as I believe that beauty is subjective, I still believe beauty exists.
User_8bbbff: What's the fundamental difference if you can say relativism is free to define its morals and rights, so therefore prone to corruption, and you saying that objectivism can also be wrong then it's a question of finding the right objectivity... doesn't that also open it up for defining what is objectively a right and what is moral?
User_11d9d9: Yes, I totally admit there can be wrong "objectivities"! 

Here I do sincerely thank you for the excellent question.

How do we figure it out? Well that is indeed the challenge.

But if we can just agree on that, that there is an objective truth independent of what we believe subjectively, that is a step forward.
User_8bbbff: Also I think a benefit of relativism is that you are always open and transparent about your beliefs and open to discussions how they evolve (as well as how they came to be and on what grounds they stand), whereas in objectivism I think you automatically have this appeal to authority from God/ whatever figure where the objective truth follows, so it becomes undebatable if something is a right
User_8bbbff: That's why I think the good thing about objectivism is if you constrain it to basic principles (you mentioned life, liberty and pursuit of happiness from Locke; that's good to me), but if you use it to go into specific social issues (abortion is, imo, very specific) it loses its appeal to me, because it argues from a position of authority and doesn't build the argument from ground up (because you just immediately go from life -> abortion), whereas in relativism you would build it on human dignity, then some feminist ideas, then healthcare... you get the idea.
User_11d9d9: Wrong objectivities.

They were objectively wrong, not subjectively wrong.

John Bingham who I quoted understood that. MLK Junior understood that.


“...no man, no matter what his color, no matter beneath what sky he may have been born, no matter in what disastrous conflict or by what tyrannical hand his liberty may have been cloven down, no matter how poor, no matter how friendless, no matter how ignorant, shall be deprived of life or liberty or property without due process of law—law in its highest sense, that law which is the perfection of human reason, and which is impartial, equal, exact justice; that justice which requires that every man shall have his right; that justice which is the highest duty of nations as it is the imperishable attribute of the God of nations.”  - John Bingham
User_11d9d9: We agree to disagree. There is objective truth to moral questions.

Persons have rights even if everyone in the world doesn't agree. You act as if that's true even if you deny that there is an objective truth to moral questions.
User_ba4913: I believe you're confusing alethic relativism (that there are no truths at all and all facts are relative), which we are not positing, with what we are questioning, i.e. moral relativism. Moral relativism, is that the moral lenses change with different cultures and perspectives. This seems to be more accurate based on the history of the world, when the moral values changed over time with culture and religions, and people changed what they viewed as 'morally correct' with evolving arguments from people like MLK Jr. And with arguments from different people in the future, we may change yet again what we believe to be morally correct. While you use this as evidence, I'm sure you can find some confederate battle cry or smt of the sort which states quite definitively that slavery should be endorsed. So the fact that MLK Jr said this doesn't make it the objective truth. Even though I acknowledge and respect totally that it helped us get from a much worse phase of humanity where human equality was not preserved.
User_11d9d9: That's why we debate it out, to find the truth.
User_d09730: once again, just because I don't believe in objectivity in rights doesn't mean I don't believe rights exist. I act as if it's true because I strongly believe it to be true. But I don't claim objectivity because I wouldn't be able to prove its objectivity.
User_11d9d9: That is not true if relativism denies that a truth exists in the first place.

That is why on questions like abortion, the conclusion of relativism unavoidably is: "Hands off, live and let live each according to their subjective truth"

If we agree there is a truth to discover on the moral question, then we may debate for a long time, but we'll aim to find out what the right thing to do is.

Abortion is either morally right or wrong. There is an answer to the moral question.

The question is not merely unanswerable.
User_ba4913: Relativism doesn't necessarily deny a moral truth exists. It just posits that we might not yet be there. And that we will never know when we get to the absolute truth. In an ever evolving world of what we think as 'ultimate moral truths', how can we say that our current one is the objective truth? It can never be proved that we are 'finally there'. Which is why from a relativistic lens, we secede that our current moral truth might not be this ultimate moral truth.
User_11d9d9: I call this a contradiction.

And that's the problem.

Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness sounds good in some cases to you, but not in others.

Well, that is as old as time, and people in the US used say that about slavery.

And that's a problem.

It was then, and it is now.

Immigrants have inalienable rights even if the law or society don't say so. The unborn have inalienable rights even if the law or society don't say so.
User_8bbbff: What about the woman's inalienable right to life (in some cases abortions can be deadly), liberty (I wouldn't say there's much liberty if you're constrained to being pregnant for 9 months again your will), and pursuit of happiness (delivering a baby against the will)... also are you against ALL abortions, or in specific cases?
User_11d9d9: Either shape or strand of relativism is wrong.

What is true and good is universally true and good, timeless, either in the US, China, or North Korea.

I don't just say—to each culture their own, end of the story and nothing to see here. North Korea doesn't like US values, but their people do deserve free speech, and they lack it, and liberty, and they lack it, and many other things. 

And I won't just say let them be because "it's all relative". Some extreme left-wing Minervans have told me that, and I firmly disagree.
User_d09730: you're making this assumption that not believing in objectivity must mean inaction in policy. Once again, exactly the same beliefs can be held, just that you don't think they are objective. Just because I think we can never arrive to an objective conclusion doesn't mean that I think nothing should be done.
User_d09730: It seems that you need objectivity to support your beliefs to support action being taken, which is not the case for me.
User_11d9d9: "once again, just because I don't believe in objectivity in rights doesn't mean I don't believe rights exist." - This is a logical contradiction.

"I act as if it's true because I strongly believe it to be true. But I don't claim objectivity because I wouldn't be able to prove its objectivity." - You can perfectly claim you can't prove its objectivity, but that doesn't imply rights are relative.
User_873098: Is what is true and good also independent of species?
User_873098: as in, are dolphins bound by the same moral code as humans
User_d09730: huh? is the extreme left-wing Minervans in the room with us?
User_d09730: How is it a logical contradiction? Do you believe in beauty? Do you believe it's an objective feature?
User_ba4913: It is not. It is not a logical contradiction. Please reread the message I sent about how relativism doesn't deny that a truth exists but just acknowledges that we might not yet be there
User_d09730: no, it implies it's subjective
User_11d9d9: Let me change your quote according to what I believe would fix it:

Relativism does necessarily deny a moral truth exists. Objectivism does necessarily afirms a moral truth exists. Objectivism posits that we may not know it, but it acknowledges it actually exists. An objectivist who believes there is a truth may admit that we will never know the absolute truth. Another objectivist may be more fundamentalist and less forgiving. But a relativist again denies there is even a truth. In an ever evolving world of what we think as 'ultimate moral truths', how can we say that our current one is the objective truth? That is indeed the question, and we should debate hard for that reason, even if it takes a long time, even if it's frustrating to do so at times. Don't jump to the conclusion yet that it can never be proved that we are 'finally there'. Perhaps it cannot. Perhaps it can. But we can have hope that we can come one day to agree that we believe something to be the truth like the idea that all human beings are created equal in dignity and rights—that we recognize that if that is true, it is the truth, today and in the year 1000 or 3000, everywhere in the world, regardless of whether people or governments agree. Which is why from a objectivist lens, we don't lose hope that there exists a moral truth that ought to be the ultimate moral truth even if we don't know it yet.

But guys, forget the labels, I somehow believe we did reach some common ground even if it's hard to explain or put in words.

At least I would hope so, that we agree there is a moral truth on the moral question of abortion, whether it will be found today or in the year 3000, just like controversial moral questions like infanticide or slavery seem clear to humanity only finally in retrospect, so we'll be judged by human beings in the year 3000 on the question of abortion, and for them it might hopefully seem much clearer what the universal moral truth on the question might be, might finally be answered in the eyes of societies, like many hard questions before. There must be an answer to the moral question.

But if we disagree today, we agree to disagree. Most likely we will.

I am Pro-Life.
User_11d9d9: No, someone in my class from M22 did use to support North Korea and Communism quite openly. Won't give names. Not sure if the person still does.
User_873098: Ants kill other ants to prevent the spread of infection. I think this is moral for ants. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5760203/

I think humans killing sick humans is probably immoral. I think there is variation in species in what is good behavior. This seems to contradict the idea of eternal truths applying to everything. I think it is very challenging to state universal facts about a coarse-grained group like a collection of biological creatures (humans) whose underlying biology is constantly in flux (especially on long time scales)

And..."species" is a term constructed by humans to make talking about atoms on a high level of analysis easier. So "universal God given rights applying only to humans" means God relied on a socially constructed concept "humans/species" in order to grant these supposedly eternal rights/truths, which doesn't make sense to me bc it mixes relativism and universalism
User_a4a8ef: if supporting a self-declared strictly communist country makes you a left wing extremist, does your unwavering support for the U.S.' capitalism also make you a right wing extremist? lol
User_11d9d9: I will leave it here, I hope you understand.

I think it was a productive debate.

But to answer your question, that person was openly supportive of North Korea, Communism, Socialism (as in total state control of the means of production), Soviet Union, Fidel Castro, Chavez, Marxism, all the package.

If you had called that person a left wing extremist, the person would probably have agreed. I am not kidding.

Perhaps I should have said far left if that is less triggering.

Anyways, the above seems extremist to me.

It's irrelevant to the main debate.

I am tuning out.

Thanks for the discussion.
User_d09730: Thx for the chat!
User_b0fcc6: North Korea isn't even a self-declared communist country nowadays. It's all Juche

--- Conversation 22 (2025-09-20) ---
User_11d9d9: I didn't read this message yesterday, so I'll add a quick note:

Do notice the absurdity of the relativist left that on this topic it always ends up comparing humans to animals, dehumanizing the fetus. Perhaps you may think it's strongly my opinionated premise (a truth that I hold to be self-evident), but the dignity of a human can't be compared to that one of an animal.

Yes, I hold that to be a universal timeless truth.

The absurdity reveals itself very well when many in the relativist left are vegans more concerned with the lives of chickens and cows than the life of a human fetus.

The absurdity reveals itself historically when we remember that some people dared to justify slavery by comparing slaves to animals. That's quite a wrong objectivity—I hope you would agree, seriously.

Which objectivity I proposed? — That all human beings are created equal in dignity and rights.

And I must add another one:

That the infinite dignity of the human person cannot be compared to the life of an ant.

That is true.

Those who can understand will understand. Those who can't won't.
User_11d9d9: Natural law - Wikipedia https://share.google/cKgTpdmgHtFbcm89s
User_11d9d9: You're conflating instinctive animal behavior with morality. But ants aren’t moral agents. They don’t deliberate about right and wrong — they act on instinct. Calling that “moral” is anthropomorphism.

You're making a category mistake. Morality isn’t about what different species do. It’s about rational beings who can choose, deliberate, and be accountable. Chickens pecking each other or ants biting isn’t evidence against natural law; it’s evidence that only humans are moral animals.

To say that “Species is a human construct” is scientism gone relativist. Classification systems are human-made, but the reality they point to isn’t arbitrary. Humans are not socially constructed: we’re a natural kind, a real biological category, with the capacity for reason and freedom.
User_873098: "species is a human construct" gets less absurd when one considers the possibility humans today could have needed social systems and moral codes that told us how to interact with neanderthals had we not killed or genetically absorbed them. 

Furthermore, 6 million years ago the ancestors of humans and chimps diverged. In 6 million years, descendents of humans will look very different from us today. If one wants truths to not be bound to a particular culture, I don't think they should be bound to a particular time frame either. 6 million years is not long on a geological scale. If in 6 or 60 or 600 million years humans become more of communal species like ants, but still retain great intelligence etc, Im not sure how the moral code can still apply unchanged.
User_11d9d9: You misunderstood the point.

You said “Species is a human construct”, and I pointed that as scientism gone relativist. Understand my argument here: Classification systems are human-made, but the reality they point to isn’t arbitrary. You're giving me the reason here when you acknowledge Neanderthals as a category capable of social systems and moral codes. We may disagree on religious and theological claims, but the point is that although the classification may be human-made, the reality is not arbitrary.
User_873098: I'm not sure I understand. Are you saying neanderthals may have had different moral codes because they are different from humans in an underlying sense?
User_873098: And if you agree that the classification of what is or is not a human is determined by humans, do you disagree that determining whether a fetus is a human is also a decision made by humans?
User_11d9d9: Can we agree on the fact that acknowledging our species as a distinct categories from animals is not a human construct? 

And neither would be acknowledging Neathertals as quite distinct, you brought them up for a reason—they weren't quite like ants or chickens or cows, that's why they are so interesting.

A dog can't rape another dog because it doesn't have a will. But if we walk down on your lane, people may start arguing that a dog may have raped another dog—which is absurd.
User_11d9d9: Reality isn't arbitrary.

Classification is human made with species insofar in the sense that we name it, but the reality is one and not arbitrary and independent of the name we give it.
User_873098: I think "species" is often a useful concept because it separates broad swaths of genetic groups.
User_873098: I'm not sure how you have access to the information that dogs don't have wills
User_11d9d9: Your quote below is thought provoking but it makes your foundation for human dignity (if it even exists at all) sit on sand against great evils like eugenics.

Because if the truth of human dignity is not universal and timeless, at some point in the future in your so called long time scale people may start claiming eugenics as moral—and surely they'll try, you can bet on that—which is a great, great evil, a falsehood, and an attack to the dignity of the human person.

You said:

"Furthermore, 6 million years ago the ancestors of humans and chimps diverged. In 6 million years, descendents of humans will look very different from us today. If one wants truths to not be bound to a particular culture, I don't think they should be bound to a particular time frame either. 6 million years is not long on a geological scale. If in 6 or 60 or 600 million years humans become more of communal species like ants, but still retain great intelligence etc, Im not sure how the moral code can still apply unchanged."
User_11d9d9: Eugenics is evil.
User_11d9d9: Basically in your example you're saying that if we become more like ants, it will be okay to kill other humans who are sick to avoid the spread of a disease.

That is literally the example you gave!

That is the problem with relativism.

Morality is relative, including human dignity, under that view. This is a mistake.


To quote you below:

"Ants kill other ants to prevent the spread of infection. I think this is moral for ants. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5760203/

I think humans killing sick humans is probably immoral. I think there is variation in species in what is good behavior. This seems to contradict the idea of eternal truths applying to everything. I think it is very challenging to state universal facts about a coarse-grained group like a collection of biological creatures (humans) whose underlying biology is constantly in flux (especially on long time scales)"
User_482864: Morality doesn’t have to be objective to be against eugenics; a social code works just the same.

Your response seems to assume that eugenics (and other great evils) are timeless facts that need an external, objective morality to make them wrong.
But it’s our morality, our social codes that we created, that define those actions as great evils to begin with.
User_11d9d9: Yes, we do.
User_11d9d9: From Love and Responsibility by Karol Wojtyla:

"The contact of the person with the objective world, with reality, is not merely “biological” (przyrodniczy), physical, as is the case with all other creations of nature (przyroda), nor only sensual, as is the case with animals.3 The human person, as a distinctly definite subject, establishes contact with other beings precisely through his interiority, whereas the whole “biological” contact, which also belongs to him—for the person possesses a body and even in a sense “is a body”—and the sensual contact in the likeness of animals do not constitute for him the characteristic ways of connecting with the world.4 Although the connection of the human person with the world begins on the “biological” and sensual basis, it is nevertheless formed in the manner proper to man only in the orbit of the interior life. Here appears a moment characteristic of the person: man not only appropriates the content that reaches him from the external world and reacts to it in a spontaneous or even downright mechanical manner, but in all his relation to this world, to reality, he attempts to make his mark, to state his “I”—and he has to act this way since this is demanded by the nature of his being. Man has a fundamentally different nature from animals. His nature includes the power of self-determination based on reflection and manifested in the fact that, while acting, man chooses what he wants to do.* This power is called free will.5"
User_873098: the whole point is that humans killing sick humans is immoral to us and if we were a different species (note this is hard to imagine!) that may not be true because our conceptions of identity, individualism, dignity, purpose, connection to others may be radically different. I'm not saying my hypothetical species that descends from humans is something I want or believe is better in any way nor am I advocating for the idea humans should actively try to change the characteristics of our children. Just that I know our descendents will be different from us in some ways.
User_11d9d9: As always, you dissolve the discussion into “anything could be otherwise,” which is the relativist comfort zone.

You dodge the foundation question: is dignity real, or not?

I believe it's real.

I'll log off. I think I have summarized my points, and you have summarized yours.

--- Conversation 23 (2025-09-21) ---
User_11d9d9: 10 people have filled out the form + a few more have reached out on Telegram.

Dropping the link again for anyone who might be interested.
 https://forms.gle/MQJCLUyE4fi8X5BM9
User_df9f1b: Thank you Messiah
User_df9f1b: it’s interesting to watch indeed!
User_209f88: im also starting a group, that doesn't have irrelevant discussions pretending its moral to take away women's rights, and has more than 10 people 🥰

in "siege towers vs trebuchets - the battle for ultimate medieval siege engine" we will talk about: 

- what your birth siege engine is, forget birthstones and zodiac signs! are you a catapult or an artillery cannon?

- which siege engine would be most likely to be fired from an office job immediately, and who would be offered the h1b 100k visa deal??

- which siege engine would actually do the work in a group project (and which would be little rascals about avoiding it)

- and last but not least, seige engine superlatives! which siege engine would survive longest in a zombie apocalypse, which would be the worst roommate? 

whimsy and seige towers await you ✨

https://t.me/+UXVTC-YRGd84Yjgx
User_209f88: and Jose is not allowed (sorry, the group voted, you know how it is having choices and democracy and all that)
User_2a3dbf: idk bro abortion is legal in our country
User_466a1a: what is this? 🤣
User_466a1a: is there a group for incels at Minerva? asking for a friend 😆
User_570bcd: only on facebook…

--- Conversation 24 (2025-09-22) ---
User_11d9d9: Allow me to put my finger on a core tension—all of you may not be as “Pro-Choice” as you pride yourselves to be if pushed to answer how you solve the cognitive dissonance (because that’s what you’re doing) to comfort yourselves against the fact that abortion is an attack against a human life.

The pro-choice side struggles to give a coherent, non-arbitrary answer to when human life deserves legal protection. You may chant all day about being “Pro-Choice”, but when forced to answer what the law should actually be, in what color category you position yourself: Up to 6 weeks? Up to 12 weeks? Up to 15 weeks? Up to 18 weeks? Up to 20-26 weeks? Up to the 3rd trimester?! Or no restrictions based on gestational duration? At some point, abortion becomes indistinguishable with infanticide and the claim that it’s not an attack against a human life is just hard to sustain.

If you say “6 weeks” → why not 5 weeks? Or 7?

If you say “12 or 15 weeks” → you’ve admitted it’s a human life later, so why was it not human before? Nothing biologically changes except size and development.

If you say “viability” (~24 weeks) → you’ve tied dignity to medical technology, which shifts over time and place (a baby viable in Boston may not be in rural Guatemala).

If you say “no gestational limit” (as in a handful of states in the USA) → you’re defending abortion even at 8–9 months, which looks indistinguishable from infanticide.

Every “limit” that pro-choice frameworks set is extrinsic (heartbeat, viability, trimester) rather than intrinsic (being human).

The Catholic Pro-Life position, that direct abortion is never permitted, insists that the only non-arbitrary line is conception, because from that moment a new, distinct human organism already exists. And you don’t need to be religious to see the philosophical moral force of that claim.

And practically by the way, even most people who identify as “pro-choice” don’t support abortion through all nine months. Polls always show broad discomfort after the first trimester. So the modern & trendy political pro-choice position (often pushing for no limits) is more extreme than what most of its supporters actually believe.

So the “big issue” is: The pro-choice side can’t explain consistently why protection starts at one week instead of another — without slipping into arbitrary lines or defending near-infanticide.

If abortion is fine at 20 weeks but murder at 21, then the law isn’t protecting human dignity — it’s just drawing arbitrary lines.

But I wouldn’t be surprised if your answer ends up being the relativist one that has been shown dozens of times in this chat: “It's a human life whenever you feel like it is a human life, because everything we believe as a society could be otherwise, and so that is why to each their own, according to their own view.” It’s the relativist comfort zone—a mistake.

This nails the core weakness. The “to each their own” position sounds tolerant, but it collapses under its own weight:

If personhood depends on subjective feeling (“I feel it’s human now”), then dignity isn’t universal — it’s conditional.

That logic could justify almost anything: slavery, infanticide, euthanasia — all were defended at some point by saying “those people aren’t fully human yet.”

A right that depends on another person’s opinion isn’t a right at all — it’s a privilege granted by the powerful.

That’s why the pro-life claim is stronger: dignity is objective, not a matter of preference. It doesn’t begin when someone feels like granting it — it begins with being human.

If humanity depends on feelings, then no one is safe when feelings change.
User_11d9d9: So what is going through people's heads to be so arbitrary and senseless as this map full of different arbitrary thresholds (that goes even as far as the third trimester) shows? I argue that it is psychological coping, cultural framing, and moral inconsistency.

Why psychological coping? Early abortion is “out of sight, out of mind”, so people picture “a clump of cells,” so it feels easier to justify. Later abortion feels more like killing a baby, so they instinctively recoil, even if their logic hasn’t changed. To protect yourselves from that discomfort, if you were legislators, you would probably carve out arbitrary lines: “Okay up to 12 weeks… but not after.”

Why cultural framing? The language around abortion is carefully chosen: “choice, procedure, tissue, viability.” It blunts the reality. Euphemisms like “reproductive rights” and “healthcare” and “medical procedure” are used. Call it for what it is—an abortion, and I would even suggest the term feticide. You have absorbed these phrases without noticing the contradictions. You aren’t reasoning from first principles, you are repeating cultural scripts.

Why moral inconsistency? Most people don’t want to think of themselves (or their friends) as murderers, so they soften the definition of “human” in early stages. At the same time, none of you (I hope...) can’t deny the humanity of a kicking, viable baby late in pregnancy. The result is an unstable middle ground, arbitrary lines that keep you feeling compassionate without demanding full consistency.

Deep down, many pro-choice people aren’t hard relativists after all. You do sense there’s something wrong with killing a nearly-born child. But you also don’t want to admit the pro-life logic that would extend protection all the way back to conception. So you stop halfway, not because it’s coherent, but because it’s emotionally easier.

That’s why we see the arbitrariness of this map that your movement is unable to solve either in the US or any other part of the world: it’s less about sound philosophy and more about *managing cognitive dissonance*. People want to be “compassionate” without facing the full weight of the truth.

In conclusion, these arbitrary lines aren’t logic, they’re people’s way of soothing themselves from the reality that abortion takes a human life.
User_50db50: Get a job or smth
User_50db50: And idk if being conservative is very brave during the times when half of the world jumps straight into extremely right-wing populism as a solution for every problem known to mankind
User_466a1a: i thought you said you're done?
User_50db50: You can never be done with the siege mentality
User_2a3dbf: prof Kukis mentioned that policy shows prioritization. People don't do abortion for fun right (cuz it is also a big harm to the mother)? they do it becuase other priority, such as mom is severe unhealthy, mom is pregnent from being rapped, abortion becuase your body resist the baby, etc. So under these situation, you are not just pro-life, you are pro-(life to be) over Mom's life, a girls life, etc. Pro-choice kinda make it sounds like i just want freedom, it is not like that bro, nobody do abortion becase they want to feel freedom
User_11d9d9: I notice you’re not denying the fetus is human — you’re saying sometimes its life is outweighed by another. That’s actually huge progress in the debate, because now you frame the moral question not as what it is but whose life we choose to protect.
User_50db50: And with this libertarian night-watchman state views of him being prolife ends when baby is born, then it’s Human Action or bs like that
User_50db50: And why does it matter
User_50db50: What implications this have into the discussion
User_11d9d9: We found common ground if we agree that it's not just an irrelevant clump of cells, but a human life.
User_11d9d9: That debate took us hrs days ago.
User_2a3dbf: i think over a certain months it is life (before that it is a bunch of tissue), but i don't think abortion is about repsecting life (personally, cuz people don't do abortion for fun and just to disrespect life). I can respect fetus are somehow close to human but abortion can still happen cuz policy is about prioritization
User_11d9d9: You’ve actually made two different claims: first, that early on it’s just tissue, and then second, that even if it’s life, policy can still choose to prioritize other things.

Regarding the first one, that's the point of my long critique above.

For the second one, the premise I have laid out to express my worldview is that Life is the highest of all Inalienable Rights. Unless we agree on this premise, we won't solve the prioritization problem.
User_2a3dbf: I don't know how you are going to solve prioritization problem tbh (one life would be gone for sure), if you can only choose between mother's life and fetus life, how would you choose?
User_11d9d9: That is an edge case. Should I assume that we agree abortion is morally wrong outside of this edge case because to abort is to take a human life? If so, that is common ground.

Regarding the edge case, that is one of the toughest edge cases.

The Catholic Pro-Life position is that direct abortion is never permitted. Direct abortion = the deliberate act of killing the unborn child as the means or the end. This is never permitted.

Indirect abortion = a medical procedure to save the mother’s life that has the unintended but foreseen side effect of the child’s death. This can be morally permissible under the principle of double effect.

One does not need to be religious to see the philosophical principle.

The moral reasoning says:

We can never intentionally choose to kill the innocent (even to save another life).

But we can act to save a life even if — outside of our intent — death results as a side effect.
User_2a3dbf: Charlie also mention that he would let his daughter (9-10 year old), if pregnant by accident, give birth to the baby. I think if you pro the baby's life, it is just harming the girls life
User_2a3dbf: let's say most common case is accidental pregent and miscarry, the abortion will happen during the 'bunch of tissue phrase'
User_2a3dbf: so bascially your argument is that, in a train delimma (which i would argue that our case is not a perfect train delimma), you will not save # people by killing 1 people (in the fetus case would be 0.2~0.8 people?)
User_11d9d9: We’re finding common ground because outside of these edge cases, we must agree that abortion is morally wrong because it takes a human life.

The case of a very young girl is tragic and heartbreaking. It highlights the failure of justice and protection around her.

But even here, the principle remains: the child conceived is also an innocent life. Two victims, not one perpetrator and one victim. The moral dilemma is real — but saying the girl’s suffering cancels out the baby’s life doesn’t solve the problem, from the Pro-Life perspective, it just adds another injustice.

I reiterate that each time we chase edge cases, we’re admitting more and more that abortion as birth control or convenience is indefensible. That’s already huge, huge common ground.

We agree abortion for convenience is indefensible.

You can’t have it both ways — either it’s life, or it’s not.

I do want to correct the misuse of the trolley problem though: Most abortions aren’t trade-offs to save other lives; they’re chosen to avoid responsibility or inconvenience.

The train-dilemma framing doesn’t really fit. In most abortions, there’s no saving of other lives — there’s just the deliberate ending of one. And in the rare edge cases (like ectopic pregnancy, rare case), the moral principle I laid out already distinguishes between directly killing and treating a pathology with tragic side effects (intention is what matters, a specific intervention with the object of saving the life of the mother, the death of the child is a side effect). What we can’t do, though, is pretend early human life is just ‘tissue’ — biology shows continuity from conception onward. To toggle back and forth between ‘tissue’ and ‘life’ depending on convenience is exactly the arbitrariness I’m critiquing.

At any rate, we’re making progress: you seem to admit later abortion is life, and you also suggest abortion for just more convenience is indefensible. That’s already huge common ground.
User_2a3dbf: I think people do late stage abrotion (when it is no longer a bunch of tissue but something close to life) mostly becuase of medical reason: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/73/ss/ss7307a1.htm These are not edge cases, people don't do abortion for fun, it is still about whose life you prioritize https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9137204/

i understand in an ideal world we want to help life, but we are not in a world like that aren't we, we have to decide whoes interest you choose to protect (a living women or a baby to be)
User_466a1a: we're not making progress. you still prioritise a nut over a real human. you've promised to drop it, but you didn't. now you misrepresent what happened earlier as you winning some argument. do you know what's #audience ?
User_11d9d9: It's true that the majority of late stage abortions are because of difficult situations.

But if we agree that it's taking a human life, that's progress.
User_11d9d9: Yes, we are making progress because we are finding common ground.

If we were in a room making legislation, we'd be able to reach a comprpmise outside many of the edge cases.

That is progress.
User_466a1a: as long as homicide and abortion mean the same to you, i'm not making no policy with you at the table
User_466a1a: debates with you stall because of differences in morals not opinions
User_11d9d9: Don't you agree that it's taking a human life?

If you don't, then sure, I'm back at square one with you.

And that's alright. We both agreee to admit it then.
User_2a3dbf: the data i sent also explain that majority abortion happen before 9 weeks, which is a size of strawbarry. I don't think that is close to life. I think late stage is close to life becuase if they are accidentally born, they could survive independently. Even for late stage something close to human life, it can be justified when it is difficulties for the mother (cuz you have to choose). How i define life could be critized as casual but like you get the point there's a difference between late stage and early stage
User_2a3dbf: can someone help me here i need to do my assignment 😭
User_466a1a: which ine of these sound like murder to you? Emergency thoracotomy; Chemo + transplant; Massive transfusion/surgery; Experimental drugs; CPR/defibrillation
User_466a1a: you're talking as if in countries where abortion is legal getting one is like doordashing boba. let me tell you a secret: even in permisse systems like Canada it still depends on the stage and reason and nobody is just handing out abortions like hot-dogs at baseball games
User_09dde9: but why are u trying to get people agree on the morality issue? [handle] was talking about prioritising, triage problem and you kept bringing it back to morality. just curious in what your intention is. [name]
User_09dde9: go do ur assignment girl lmao
User_09dde9: [name] just putting the discussion out of context for a little, i’m also curious in what you plan to do after, say, you did get a few people to criticise abortion. what’s next? that is a genuine question not for mocking the whole move to be clear
User_45b134: I just want to say one point not about your argument - but no one who is getting an abortion at 7-9 months is doing it because they didn't want the baby
User_f28ef1: also i'm putting this forward because i'm getting sick of clearing the notifications on this chat, i am fully admitting that it's not an argument, nor productive, and is simply a personal attack: jose, you seem like a really uncool person to hang out with and i would never want to be your friend. i sincerely hope you find your people and, more importantly, that your echo chamber learns how to be kinder to people outside of it
User_e40c81: lol yes bae the problem is complicated and people don't have a definitive answer but no-abortion-whatsoever is not a good one too

--- Conversation 25 (2025-09-22) ---
User_11d9d9: I just want to clarify that the group I propose doesn't aim to be an echo chamber. As I stated, people with different political views are welcome to join if they want to read, post, comment, and participate with respect. You are welcome to join.

It's also worth noticing that the name of the group will be "Minerva University Conservatives & Libertarians (Students & Alumni)". Conservatives and libertarians disagree passionately about many issues, including abortion and immigration among others.

It's also true that I have mentioned elsewhere that I’ve collaborated with organizations like the Cato Institute and the Acton Institute. Many scholars at the Cato Institute are adamantly Pro-Choice, whereas scholars at the Acton Institute are adamantly Pro-Life. In the group, I’ll be sharing thought-provoking readings, opportunities, and events in the space that you might not otherwise come across, including debates.

https://forms.gle/MQJCLUyE4fi8X5BM9
User_11d9d9: https://youtu.be/akYYm47pCP4
User_09dde9: [name] still interested in this
User_11d9d9: You said: ‘Echo was talking about prioritizing, triage problem, and you kept bringing it back to morality.’ The reason I did that is because part of the debate has to be about the morality of it. Earlier, some people here tried to make it seem like it’s impossible to agree on any moral truth — that’s the relativist move. I don’t accept that. We may not all agree, but we should at least acknowledge—and that would achieve us common ground—that the moral question is objectively real and worth debating.

Of course, agreeing on the moral principle — whether abortion is right or wrong — is one thing, and deciding whether or how the government should intervene is another. But they’re not two separate debates; the legal question only makes sense once you’ve wrestled with the moral one — which is the underlying one. It’s one long debate, not two unrelated ones.
User_09dde9: I see, thank you for clarifying.

--- Conversation 26 (2025-09-23) ---
User_9611e8: I wasn't planning on joining this conversation, but I will just with this one comment - you have been presented with a ton of arguments that have addressed all of your points, you have been taken quite seriously through most of this conversation, and yet you keep on searching for a way to push our boundaries/definitions/stances, searching the fault in our logics or morals, instead of critically applying #selfawareness and checking whether any of the points actually make you question a part of your stance.
I want to ask another question though - do you really think that this debate will bring you anywhere closer to the expected result instead of just hurting people in this community? If we are talking about morals here, how moral is it to ask us - or any women/people able to give birth really - to stand behind a binary, good-vs-evil view of the world, where our responsibility is to protect cells without memories or feelings instead of ourselves because otherwise we are unjust? You are asking us to follow your (arbitrary, not objective!) hierarchy of rights, not thinking at all about contextual pain that you are inflicting.
Is it moral to accuse people in this community of being murderers or children of murderers without knowing their context, stories, life circumstances? Is it moral to draw arbitrary, unmovable lines, which will potentially result in death or not-being-born by some people? Because yes, your whole argument about life being the highest right assumes that there is either one or two lives at stake - but it's never just that, it's always also the family, the children that were already born, and children that might be born in the future. 
What I do know though is that while I understand that this space is supposed to serve controversial debates, the most immoral thing you are doing right now is indirectly indicating that lives of some of us are worth less than lives of what could be.
User_11d9d9: I’m not proposing an arbitrary hierarchy; my premise is that the right to life is the foundation of all rights. All evil begins with falsehood — replacing a true premise with a false one — and that’s the core difference between our messages.
User_e8db04: Thank you.
User_e8db04: I don't want to debate here, because I'm not in the right headspace to do so. But the claim that the right to life is the foundation of all rights-- I just want to point out how incredibly debliitating having a child is, especially when it was forced onto you-- especially so if you're a young girl. It can absolutely ruin your life. It can physically and mentally destroy you, not to mention financially as well. Why should the life of the unborn child take precedence over the existing human?
User_e8db04: If someone commits a crime as heinous as sexual assault, I do not believe it could ever be just to force the victim to carry the consequence of that. You have no idea how utterly damaging it is.
User_e8db04: It is never as simple as "I want things to live so I'm against abortion". It's ignorant to reality. There are ways to argue for it, but you lost my support the moment you mentioned "what about the baby" to a hypothesized 10-year-old mother.
User_2a3dbf: you did defend the baby's right but you did not protect the mother at all lol what about their right as we do not live in a perfect world

I don't know what right a fetus has (espacially when most of the abortion happen before fetus grows more than a strawbarry tbh a monkey is more similar to a human compared to a 9 week fetus)
User_e8db04: omg echo hi ^_^
User_11d9d9: "Why should the life of the unborn child take precedence over the existing human?"

This concedes we agree it is a human life.

"you did defend the baby's right but you did not protect the mother at all lol what about their right as we do not live in a perfect world"

This concedes we agree the baby has rights.

This is important.

The moral questions you ask are hard moral questions.

But I must point out to the key premise that you miss. Life is the highest of all Inalienable Rights.

Both lives matter.
User_e8db04: You did not engage whatsoever with the fact that I pointed out that carrying a child when you're not ready for one destroys the life of the mother. You cannot make that claim and in the same breath, say "both lives matter".
User_e8db04: If you're against abortion, are you in support of systems made to protect and help parents? Are you aware that being raised in a household that is not accomodated to raise a child, for financial reasons or other, is also extremely damaging to the child's upbringing?
User_11d9d9: My lense is the Catholic one, albeit one doesn't need to be religious to understand the moral principle.

The maximization of comfort is not what determines what is the right thing to do.

You frame your question in terms of  the sacrifice it takes to do what is truly right, but indeed the moral principle I emphasize is one of honor, justice, doing what's right even when it is hard, very hard.

Both lives matter.

Yes, systems in support  made to protect and help parents are sound.

There exist Pro-Life Democrats. Were you aware?

A difficult upbringing is not an excuse to ending a child's life. That excuse used to be used not many centuries ago to commit infanticide in poor villages. That was objectively wrong.

Same moral principle: What is true and good may not be the easiest thing to do, but it is the right thing to do.

https://www.democratsforlife.org/
User_e8db04: I'm sorry, but in the face of very valid arguments you keep repeating statements that ultimately mean nothing. We concede that it's a human life. Sure. But you've not addressed a single other concern I raised. If you're going to continue to ignore our arguments like this you might as well not reply.
User_2a3dbf: what i heard from you is that you want to help baby but you have no solution for any mother so just leave them be (as a choice)
User_e8db04: I am fully aware of the fact that pro-life democrats exist. I have said, previously, that there are valid ways to argue for abortion.
User_11d9d9: I addressed them above.
User_e8db04: > The maximization of comfort is not what determines what is the right thing to do.
Comfort is very different from wellbeing. 

I think you still don't understand that some people legitimately do not have any choice but to abort if they want to live. 

You still seem to think that people for abortion are just doing it as a whim.
User_e8db04: It stops becoming about "comfort" the second we are talking about crippling someone's mind, body, and financial standing for life.
User_2a3dbf: even a better way to make policy is just:

1. allow medical reason for abortion 
2. give support to single mother 
3. encourage father's saying and accompanying
4. reduce under age pregency 
5. build a system to raise orphan babies

Instead of saying ending life (to be) is absolutely bad and nobody do it/ go to jail

im not religious and i don't buy into the argument btw. In nature mammals mother choice to digest their babies when mother does not have enough nutrition etc. It is just a natural thing
User_e8db04: That said, this is far from a fruitful discussion. 
I apologize for engaging with it. Maybe it's best if we drop it now. There seems to be no progress being made on the debate.
User_e8db04: But if you think it is worth it to force a 10-year-old girl who endured a horrific crime to carry to term, all because of your belief of "life", I have nothing left to say to you.
User_11d9d9: Actually that is very fruitful.

You could get me to sign that bill in many states in this map.

It's a compromise but it is one in what I see is the right direction in very permissive states.

Some people say this is not a fruitful debate but it is.

In real life you'd have to debate people with different views and it is difficult but it must be done.

*Edit: The point is not that we buy into each other's arguments, but that we can find areas of compromise where we can reach common ground. I am sure in many of this states the parties don't buy each other's arguments, but they must still draft legislation in real life. I thought that was fruitful but I guess we don't see eye to eye.
User_3f5641: It impresses me so much that you spent 4 years traveling with minervans, saw so many different cultures, people with different realities, backgrounds, ideals... and still has such a close mind. No one will force you to agree with abortion and no one is asking someone close to you to do it, but everyone gave you thousands of reasons as to why it might be necessary in multiple situations. If you think that a child should carry a baby after being raped or that it’s better for someone without any financial, mental and family stability to give birth to just give the baby to adoption or abandon it after, you are just stupid.

Someone who wants the child will not go through abortion just because they can, it’s not a procedure people do for fun (even though everyone already told you this). And worse than that is that whichever view and opinion you have, people WILL CONTINUE DOING ABORTIONS. Why not give a way for them to do it safely? Because those with money will go to doctors and pay more even if it’s illegal, but those who don’t have financial conditions will look for ways to do it that can put them at risk. Being from Latin America you should know this, unless you’re so in love with the US that it blinded you to the reality we live in.

This is not my place of discussion to say what it should and shouldn't be done. You will never have to pass through this situation and neither will I. Go find something else to do with your time, do some work, swim, go out, I don't fucking know.

And stop bringing religion to the discussion, it just makes you look worse.
User_2a3dbf: how is that fruitful if there's still 1/3 places girls can't get abortion if they are pregnent accidentally do you ever have a girlfriend and understand the risk (or you are gay/lesbian so not really worrying about that)
User_11d9d9: https://www.democratsforlife.org/
User_2a3dbf: bro it is not about democrats most of us are not even americans
User_570bcd: democrats are also pretty right-wing so this makes sense lol
User_11d9d9: I know, but I still thought it was worth sharing.
User_17f6b8: I think you're conceding too much, this is pretty much pro life already, no wonder he's considering it a win
User_11d9d9: https://www.democratsforlife.org/index.php/about-us/faq
User_17f6b8: I think this is a hard argument to win for the pro-choice side in this form. (Though the insistence in universal vs relative morality came from the pro-life and by taking it at face value I may be strawmanning)

In my view, normative moral relativism is itself an universal moral claim. That is, when you're saying "we should all respect different opinions, cultures, give support bc we don't know what the person is going through", that's an universal moral claim.

When you assume despite all the differences in religion, culture, native language, ... we can all in the end reach the same correct truth about what to do, this is suspiciously close to assuming there is a kind of universal logos we're trying to get at.
User_17f6b8: And I think if anything the pro-choice would be the "natural" position, if you take religion out of it. Because it's just letting the natural course of events happen without invonving the repressive state apparatus. And what's been happening in human societies for ages.
User_e8db04: I feel it's important to make the distinction between personal morals and legal policies.

Abortion is uncomfortable. You can be against it personally for any reason or another- if you decide this is wrong for your own personal sphere to do that is your issue. I will not get in the way of that, as long as you've made that decision for yourself.

That said, assuming that it is true that we all have our own sets of ideals, culture, morals, etc... why not let the people who are in support of abortion make that choice themselves? As Pedro outlined, banning it legally does more harm than good considering that in some situations it will be necessary, and removing legal access to it only drives people to more extreme and dangerous solutions.
User_e8db04: I personally disagree with [normative] moral relativism to some degree, especially when applied to policy. Laws need to be in place for the security of people, even if not everybody agrees with them. If we keep trying to find common ground on everything we will go nowhere.
User_17f6b8: I think this is more in line with descriptive moral relativism. If there was an absolute moral stance, we could all agree on it. Because there isn't, we need to try and find compromise, but at the end of the day almost every law is a group imposing its morality/culture onto society. Which may be justified, but should always be viewed with suspicion, as trading freedom for security tends to be a faustian bargain.
User_e8db04: It is a debatable topic for sure. I've lived in two societies that are on either end of the spectrum of freedom vs security. Both have their qualities and flaws.

That said, I still don't believe this means Catholic values or similar would take precedence in determining abortion laws, especially in the harsh reality that people have been facing.
User_487e33: My head hurts from reading all of this oh my lord I feel like it’s time for cat stickers
User_17f6b8: I like approaching freedom as practice. A challenge to create socialization, order, commons, a livable environment... minimizing the need to recourse to authority
User_487e33: Also notice that almost this entire debate has been held by men, as far as I can assume. It’s so uncomfortable for me, as a woman with a uterus, to read you talk about the morality of aborting an infant when I’m thinking about HOW IT EFFECTS THE LIVING WOMAN (or uterus-haver). I’m scared to get pregnant at my age because in this capitalistic and individualistic society, having a child at 21 is like “throwing your life away,” or so it’s been said to me by people in my culture. I wouldn’t want to have a child right now. I would not have the capacity to raise it well, and I would feel worse putting it up for adoption. I also would be in a guilt spiral about getting an abortion. Please control your dicks and find some male contraception before debating the few rights that women have to control their lives in this utterly male dominated world.
User_e8db04: I'm a transgender man. (Pre-op, so I have all my organs too.)
User_17f6b8: In my country we have big religous organizations making headway into politics, in what I see as a clear attempt at theonomy. Which is always a risk in a country where there's a religious majority, that they'll dress their religious arguments as secular and make it into law.

It pays to learn how do deal with this rhetoric.
User_e8db04: You're right, though. It's very scary to me how almost all the policies made about abortion are made by people who do not need to undergo them. 

I don't want to say that people who don't have female anatomy aren't entitled to their opinions, because they absolutely are, but it's just a fact that there will be things that they will not understand as readily.
User_a4a8ef: girl it's the controversial discussions channel😭 keem em cats away
User_a4a8ef: Agree with your point, would also like to call attention to the fact that policies that primarily, or exclusively, affect other marginalized groups such as people of color, lgbtq, immigrants, etc. will always inevitably involve people who don't belong in them at all
User_e8db04: Lol right like god leave us alone already I just want to live
User_a4a8ef: It's an important perspective to consider that we can't fully grasp the situation but it's a matter of reality that it will always involve outsiders, so being annoyed at men debating abortion is understandable tho not so logical I guess
User_a4a8ef: tho I am as annoyed as anybody else at Jose's religious bigotism advertised as some secular rational morality shit
User_52ac9c: From that some logic you're applying, one can argue that we should exterminate half the population of the world because superpopulation is a problem that has a big priority, because for this person and their religion, having an inhabitable earth is the """"highest of all inalienable rights""" and reducing superpopulation should be the main priority even if that means causing suffering for lots and lots of ppl and damaging society as a whole. This person's belief comes from their religion's lens, """albeit one doesn't need to be religious to understand the moral principle""".
And of course, we can't forget the most important part: just because this "person's religion lens" says so and just because they believe that "it's a moral principle regardless of one being part of the religion", we should force this rule onto everyone and ppl should gladly give their lifes for extermination after being randomly selected at a raflle.

If you don't agree with abortion, then the solution is simple: don't get an abortion yourself. Oh wait, you're not even one of the affected people... so I guess it's very easy for you to argue against abortion.
Try putting yourself in other people's shoes man, if I had a daughter, or a sister, or a mother, or a friend, or any woman important to me that end up being raped (similar to being randomly selected at a raffle in the example above, since this is by chance and they can't choose whether they will be raped or not), I would like them to be able to get an abortion if they wish - I don't think their lifes should be destroyed because of something that's not even their fault. Society already failed in protecting these victims, let's not fail AGAIN in supporting them.

And it's crazy how people care so much about unaliving cells... that is, until they become real living humans. When they become real humans and are born, ppl against abortion don't say a word about the real issues.

I haven't seem in your list of highlighed issues (or in the list of any ppl who share similar oppressive opinions), the issue of overpopulated foster homes, the tons of children living below the poverty line, lack of aid and support for poor families who carry children and don't have the resources to sustain them.

I think you just don't see the oppressive, biased mindset you have. Reading your messages, the idea that I get from you is that you feel that you are part of a group of ppl who hold the truth and the "real" values, and that you have a mission of spreading your (biased, oppressive) values to everyone else (which matches your absolute framing of values and fixed mindset, leaving no room for considering alternative views - since so far you have been so focused on changing what everyone is thinking but youself haven't changed a single of your own opinions, despite being the only one here advocating for oppresive views, so clearly you're not open to learning which is (or should be) the core aspect of a discussion/debate. So what you're doing here is not a debate in case you're thinking it is - it's just trying to force your limited views onto others). I feel that you have this need to change what ppl think because you think that people who don't agree with your simplified, incomplete, and restrict worldview are destroying society (at least, the perspective of society you have in your mind), so you want that your values are forced into people, advocating for restricting womens' and ppl who give birth's rights. If you want to restrict people's right, then restrict your own - not everyone's. No one has the obligation to adhere to your "moral lens", especially one that is absolute. If abortion bothers you, don't do it - don't be fighting to restrict people's right just because YOU think it's wrong. What you think is wrong or right is of no relevance to anyone else but yourself.


For reference, here's a list of historical events of people who believed that their """inealiable rights and values""" should be forced onto society just because they think their values are """inealiable""":
User_52ac9c: - Hitler believed that a single ethnic group is superior to all others and have the right to exterminate everyone who is "inferior" according to his own views. For him, this false ""issue"" was important enough that should be forced into everyone else. Instead of himself isolating from the world (since he didn't want to mix with other ethnicities), he wanted the world to change. Similarly, people against abortion want to force the prohibition onto everyone else instead of just avoiding abortion for themselves.

- Jesuits in Latin America believed Catholicism was the one true faith and forced conversion on Indigenous peoples, erasing native beliefs and cultures instead of letting diverse traditions coexist.

- The Spanish Inquisition believed only one form of Christianity was acceptable, persecuting Jews, Muslims, and even other Christians to impose their version of “truth.”

- The British Empire believed their “civilizing mission” gave them the right to colonize and exploit large parts of Africa and Asia, forcing their laws, economy, and culture onto entire populations.

- Prohibitionists in the US believed alcohol was morally unacceptable and tried to ban it for everyone, even those who didn’t share their values, leading to black markets and violence.
User_e8db04: Damn king pop off
User_e8db04: sorry my #professionalism is coming the fuck OFF right now lol i'm just tired
User_a4a8ef: pietro i wanna be besties with you
User_2d7394: You advertise freedom so much and yet deny this simple liberty to the mother. Being pro-choice is not pro-abortion, and it does not mean that if you were pregnant that you would get an abortion. A lot of pro-choicers would never get an abortion themselves but would never strip that freedom of choice away from other people so I beg this question of you - why should your opinion take precedence over others? Because we both have two different mentalities and subsequent political ideologies, but mine would let you carry out your opinion, but yours wouldn't reciprocate that to me. How about that freedom?
User_2d7394: That's our pietro 🥹
User_11d9d9: Alex O'Connor is an atheist and has wrestled with the question of abortion. I thought I would leave some of his thoughts here.

https://x.com/CosmicSkeptic/status/1275426832939171840
User_11d9d9: https://x.com/CosmicSkeptic/status/1275426832939171840
User_11d9d9: https://x.com/CosmicSkeptic/status/1275948161052413959
User_11d9d9: It's essential to see that it's not just a lifestyle question. If it's a human life, a life is at stake.

Quoting Alex O'Connor, who is an atheist:

"I'm sorry but the question of when abortion is wrong and when not is a deeply important philosophical question. If a foetus is a human life it is one of the most important questions that exists. Noting that it's not morally right in all circumstances is 'beating back progress'? " (emphasis added)

https://x.com/CosmicSkeptic/status/1275948161052413959
User_2a3dbf: bro still have no answer to women's human right tho
User_11d9d9: I'm not sure I fully understand you, but the moral principle I advocate for is that both lives have infinite dignity as human persons—that dignity is also women's human right. If we accept that and firmly commit to it, prioritization of one life over another is strictly forbidden, and everything must always be done to save and help both lives for both have inalienable dignity (inalienable means that it cannot be taken or given away). That is the Pro-Life point of view. Direct abortion is never permitted. Only indirect abortion where an action that aims to save the life of the mother but may have as an unintended side effect the foreseen (yes, even foreseen, even if it's not directly intended) death of the child may sometimes be admissible. But the moral principle applies to abortion and any other context: one must not directly pick a life over another one even in the face of utilitarian arguments that advocate for maximizing comfort, utility, or even well-being.

As Alex O'Connor who is an atheist acknowledges:"if a foetus is a human life it is one of the most important questions that exists."
User_2a3dbf: i think if after all these explaination you still can't get it you might never get it

Do we have other controversial topic cuz this one does not feel like controversial anymore (we only have one disagreement)
User_11d9d9: https://youtu.be/jIxlXnj3kzE
User_45b134: I personally would love to hear opinions on the rise of colonized countries (specifically in Africa) in global rankings especially in terms of technological development
User_45b134: Because I think the benefit is that they get to see what all other nations are doing 'wrong' and being able to do things better the first time like in cases of renewable energy and waste management systems
User_45b134: but it is still difficult for them to recover and I'm curious to know from people who know more than I do on this
User_2a3dbf: that's a good one
User_45b134: I'm sure someone else can put it in more eloquent terms, but it is something I'm curious about
User_17f6b8: There is so much. But one thing I'd like to point out is that much of the apparent tech debt is a consequence of the TRIPS agreement, where the US basically forced its IP laws on the rest of the world via the World Trade Organization.

Add to that the control of international trade by global north, and while it seems obvious they could leapfrog by going straight to current tech, it's a lot harder than it looks. Companies are parenting even the seeds
User_c0b244: appeal to authority if the authority was some random man on twitter

--- Conversation 27 (2025-09-23) ---
User_11d9d9: https://secularprolife.org/team/

Worth sharing
User_c0b244: My point is that if you’re debating individuals, you shouldn’t go find other people who share perceived characteristics with them and use the fact that those other people agree with you to support your point. That’s just feeding red team/blue team polarization. You should engage with the people you’re talking to and genuinely listen to their perspectives and ideas
User_d09730: As someone who was once religious, and once did subscribe to an worldview relying on objective truth, I empathize with how difficult it is to believe that meaning, truth, and motivation to act can exist if there is no objective truth backing it. When I argue about similar topics with my family, and they fall back to the "well if there is no objective truth, why do you not go around and steal and murder", I don't scoff them away as being ridiculous because I know exactly how impossible it feels.

During the years I left Christianity, it was truly really hard. Partly for interpersonal reasons, but also because I had grown up believing that the only way anything is meaningful, the only way anything can be true, is if and only if there is objective backing to it. Under this worldview, it was truly dangerous to stop being Christian, to leave objectivity, because it wasn't just leaving one truth for another, but leaving truth, meaning, and morality in its entirety. This feeling of danger I understand, a loss of morality, but it's only a loss of objective morality. I've been at both places, and there is truth, meaning, and morality, outside objectivity, it's just that under some beliefs they're defined as meaningless if they don't have objectivity.

The reason I bring this up is that, while I find any fundamentalist or moral objectivist standpoint to be inherently limited in its ability to empathize with non-believers, as truly putting yourself in someone else's shoes requires you to abandon (at least to a degree) the objectivity of your standpoint, I also think that many who have never believed in objectivity fall short of truly empathizing with the one believing in objectivity. True conviction of an objective worldview is extremely strong, and not simply a failure of imagination as it may seem from certain outside perspectives.

With that said, I still disagree with you josé. But, with a stronger confidence than my disagreement with anything, I know that I never will have the full picture, I will never have full understanding. If I believed I did, I would not be able to truly empathize, and never be able to truly learn the other persons perspective. For that I would have to admit that I might be wrong about my worldview. 

I admit the possibility that objective morality may exist, since I could never disprove its existence, what I strongly believe is that humanity will never understand it fully or have the full picture, regardless of whether objectivity exist. Even when the objective truth seems to be quite clearly laid out, we seem to be unable to agree what it actually is (e.g. Abrahamic religions). Up to this point I feel like we agree. 
Under this it, in practice, becomes irrelevant whether there is an objective truth behind the veil or a subjective one, as long as we agree that we're not there and we need to work hard to get there.
User_d09730: The assumption you make here is that humans wouldn't struggle as hard for change if the truth behind the veil wasn't objective. You even assumed that it would lead us to "unavoidably hold the 'live and let live position' ".

Earlier when I said -"Things like the abolition of slavery and promotion of gender equality would not have happened if people did not challenge what the broad society found to be objective truths at the time."
You replied -"Those achievements wouldn't have happened if those generations had not believed there is a higher, universal, timeless truth that goes beyond people's opinions".

Here I think we reach an important disagreement that connects back to the beginning of my previous message. I know that it is truly truly hard to imagine why anyone would work as hard for change if they are not working for the objective truth, per religious premise there is no higher cause, but the truth (as I believe) is that humans can, do, and have worked equally as hard and believed as strongly, even without objectivity. When I was religious I would not believe that, I can imagine you might also not believe that, but if you take the liberty to imagine it you would see that at its core we are all working towards the truth behind the veil, with equal ability and validity. We simply disagree about the shape and nature of what's behind the veil, something we can never prove or logically persuade each other about.

I hope to be able to persuade you that a lack of objective truth does not imply any less strength in humans' ability to believe, act, or pursue moral truth.
User_916a08: Bro like i really dont care enough to go in to depth
User_916a08: But like at minimum we must all be adults, dont we have other responsibilities? Jobs perhaps?
User_916a08: Like guys twitter is that way 😭😭😭
User_11d9d9: I am very 100% sure that I am the one debating ideas here. Plenty of people including you have tried to dismiss my points because of who I am and not what I have to say.

So that's why I show you that here are atheists, here are women, here are people with lived experience, and they still raise the same point. This shows the argument isn’t ‘Catholic’ or ‘male’; it’s a question about reason and moral philosophy.

https://secularprolife.org/team/
User_a4a8ef: dude there is a tiny but existing group of black white supremacists, what do the existence of such fringe communities prove?
User_916a08: Working at mcdonalds for the hours u spend here, and contributing that money to the Klan is probably more productive than bashing your head into this community 😭😭😭
User_11d9d9: Debate ideas. Let me quote Lydia:

"My point is that if you’re debating individuals, you shouldn’t go find other people who share perceived characteristics with them and use the fact that those other people agree with you to support your point. That’s just feeding red team/blue team polarization. You should engage with the people you’re talking to and genuinely listen to their perspectives and ideas"
User_11d9d9: I haven't dismissed anyone's points because of who they are.

You were the ones who started doing that.

Which is a fallacy as old as time.

Me quoting atheists and women is to show how dull the fallacy is. The point or argument is not proven by appealing to authority, but it does reveal the absurdity of dismissing my points time and again and again and again because of the attributes of the people arguing for a point of view.
User_a4a8ef: she is right tho😭
User_a4a8ef: i see no lies
User_11d9d9: Debate ideas, don't do ad hominems.

I haven't done a single ad hominem, and I have received countless.

If I quote anyone, engage with the ideas of the quote, not their religion or lack of, or whether they are men or women.

Let me quote Lydia:

"My point is that if you’re debating individuals, you shouldn’t go find other people who share perceived characteristics with them and use the fact that those other people agree with you to support your point. That’s just feeding red team/blue team polarization. You should engage with the people you’re talking to and genuinely listen to their perspectives and ideas" (emphasis added)
User_209f88: then lets talk about anti abortion republicans who either got abortions or made women get abortions 🥰 shall we? 

Scott DesJarlais (TN Representative)  Republican, pro-life. A woman alleged that he pressured a mistress to have an abortion. Also, during his divorce proceedings, records showed his ex-wife had had two abortions; DesJarlais admitted to the affair and other misconduct.  He has long defended his pro-life credentials despite these revelations.

Herschel Walker, a Republican Senate candidate in Georgia. Multiple women alleged Walker paid for or pressured them to have abortions (including a 2009 allegation supported in reporting by a receipt and a check). 

Rep. Kat Cammack (R-FL), (example of a pro-life Republican experiencing care delays) In May 2024 she experienced an ectopic pregnancy and publicly said hospital staff hesitated to give standard methotrexate treatment because of fear over Florida’s six-week law; she says she had to push for care to get the abortion.

Jose the people telling you to believe these things dont event buy into them.
User_11d9d9: This is logically irrelevant. Personal hypocrisy doesn’t invalidate a moral principle. If someone cheats on their spouse, it doesn’t make fidelity meaningless; if someone murders, it doesn’t make ‘don’t kill’ obsolete. We should discuss the principle on its merits, not just people’s failures to live up to it.
User_209f88: it does bring up how many of your arguments and logic are not exactly grounded in the reality of what abortions are, and who is arguing for them. when even the most anti abortion advocates still pressure women into having abortions it points out that there is a) hypocrisy among the people with these beliefs, and b) a validated necessity for them even amongst those who believe they are most wrong and evil.
User_209f88: when they go to recieve abortions themselves, because of pregnancy complications, and then complain about how difficult it was for them to get care they would have died without, it highlights that again.
User_209f88: i would love to share with you with this quote from the WHO on abortions. I think if this is something you are arguing for, you should be well aware of the scope and reality of the issue.

"Inaccessibility of quality abortion care risks violating a range of human rights of women and girls, including the right to life; the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health; the right to benefit from scientific progress and its realization; the right to decide freely and responsibly on the number, spacing and timing of children; and the right to be free from torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment."
User_209f88: You should also understand that 45% of all abortions are performed unsafely, and this is due to lack of access to medical facilities which can perform safe abortions. The World Bank estimates that over 68,000 women die each year from unsafe abortions.
User_209f88: And this does not begin to cover the livelihoods of women who are forced to carry full term, often in poverty, and at great personal cost. Denial of abortion care has long-term impacts, not just on health, but also on education, employment, and economic stability. Women who are denied abortions are more likely to fall into deeper financial distress, remain in abusive relationships, and struggle to provide for their existing children.

Research from institutions like the World Bank and J-PAL shows that these harms extend beyond individuals to entire communities: unsafe abortion burdens already fragile health systems, economic productivity is reduced when women cannot participate fully in the labor force, and children born from unintended pregnancies are more likely to face adverse outcomes themselves.

Restricting abortion access doesn’t prevent abortions, it only makes them unsafe, inequitable, and more damaging. The real-world consequences are preventable deaths, increased poverty, and generational cycles of disadvantage.
User_209f88: Lack of abortion care is not just an individual or isolated issue, it is a global public health, human rights, and economic justice issue. And Jose, that is what your arguments are almost entirely disregarding. In the name of logic, you are throwing a complicated global reality away because it is easier to argue in hypotheticals.
User_c0b244: This text was not me saying that the opinion wasn’t valid because it’s a man. The emphasis was “random”. I feel the exact same way about the random women whose opinions you shared.
User_11d9d9: Fine, it was a misunderstanding then.

I agree we should engage with the people we are talking to and genuinely listen to their perspectives and ideas.
User_2a3dbf: i don't think he live in such real world and care about real problem. he just want to be morally right. pro-life, pro baby and women life (as a slogan cuz you can't pro both in real life senario )
User_2a3dbf: we give you so many case and explaination and context, you just keep saying it is (potential) life. Do you ever have a sister, a girlfriend, or any women you care enough to have some empathy so you get what is the actual choice they are making
User_2a3dbf: can you just move on to whatever supporting people own a gun, also a classic libertarian thing
User_2a3dbf: If you are pausing to find some twitter or YouTube video please don’t
User_f28ef1: it's situations like these where debating what's objectively right/wrong or getting too lost in obvectivity/relativism is really beside the actual point. philosophy pissed me off for so many years until i found out about care ethics (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethics_of_care): i act morally based on the relationships i have with the people around me, the people i choose to be a part of my community (who would treat me with the same level of care) and the world at large. humans make prosocial decisions without a big scary god telling them the rules! i live in the real world and have friends and know that supporting their choice to have (or not have!) an abortion shows that i care about their autonomy, freedom, and general wellbeing. i said earlier that i would never be your friend, jose, because although you insist in theory that you care about the "life" of the fetus and the living pregnant person, the insistence on theory distracts you from actual reality and shows that you actually do not care about the lives of pregnant people
User_f28ef1: this argument in particular is so ridiculous to me because why do you need to jump through these particular moral hoops to let someone get an abortion to save their life? i think it's strange that your position on abortion hinges on denying people the autonomy to directly make their own moral decision, given that you're theoretically trying to create a space here where different moral positions are encouraged. as people have already said here, the actual practical effect of the anti-abortion movement is not in encouraging people to not get abortions, it's making it medically inaccessible in situations like these to where the pregnant person's life ends up becoming secondary! so you are (indirectly) choosing one "life" over the other here my guy. and if it all boils down to the fact that you are unable to make a direct, real-world moral decision of your own, i think that you are actively avoiding being human
User_f28ef1: in summation: i would not be friends with someone who wouldn't take me to the abortion clinic. and that's really sad because i think i'm a really good friend, i make a mean charcuterie board and write lots of love letters
User_8bbbff: Jose, curious, what's the practical implications of your thoughts on abortion in terms of actual policy. Like, do you want it completely banned, banned in most cases, or you find it morally abhorrent yet you allow it to be legal so that everyone makes their choice about it?
User_1be83c: Curious about the same.
User_11d9d9: This message summarizes my view.
User_11d9d9: I'd sign this bill.

Specifics in 1 are to be debated because it is complex, it's necessary, but this is generally the right direction.
User_8bbbff: So not at-will?
User_11d9d9: No
User_2a3dbf: it was trying to help you to think about it in a more comprehensive policy way not  proposing a solution (for the record cuz this is obviously not good enough
User_466a1a: it was a misunderstanding?!!! So you have no shame?! You accused someone of attacking you for who you are (very big accusation) and then back off immediately saying it was a misfuckingunderstanding?!
User_466a1a: let me tell you a secret, jose: nobody here even knows you
User_466a1a: People have been very respectful and patient with you here (not me, i don't give a rat's bottom about you) and you promised you'll stop spamming. So keep your word, "christian" manly man who speaks on behalf of us even tho nobody asked
User_d09730: Hey, that's unnecessary. This is a mutable chat made for this purpose, controversial discussions.
User_466a1a: what WAS necessary in this conversation?
User_466a1a: The whole purpose of this sub is to talk controversial stuff. You have the option to mute it too :)
User_52ac9c: Notice I said "from that same logic" that you were using, in the example I gave. And you did mention your lens is catholic, and that even tho your lens is catholic your argument comes from a moral principle that even who is not from the religion should see and hold (even though this argument comes completely out of the blue, you just say "albeit one doesn't need to be religious to understand the moral principle" as if saying that makes your argument valid without any source or logical connection. Just bc you said one who is not religious should hold the same moral values, it doesn't make it true). 

Similarly, my example is a person who has a religion X and has a moral perspective X, saying that everyone, even ppl outside the religion, should be able to understand the "moral principle" (even tho it's clearly not a moral principle, the person in the example and you just got that out of the blue and called it a moral principle)

Notice, I even used in my message some of the same words you used to point out some of the multiple aspects where your argument is flawed (for more info read the full message and with attention)

My message does not discriminate against your religious beliefs or who you are. Instead, I make a point to make it clear that you can't use your identity as an excuse to justify oppressive views, and more importantly, as a """reason""" to change laws or rules so that everyone else have to adhere to what you believe is moral or not
User_11d9d9: Can you engage with the moral principles then?

I already quoted many secular sources that raise the same arguments.
User_11d9d9: Here is the summary.
User_11d9d9: "The right to life comes before all other rights"

Non-Catholic source.

But this is a shared premise.
User_11d9d9: This one as well.

It comes from secular pro life org

Premises:

- "All human organisms are morally relevant"

Among others they give which are correct

Not a Catholic source
User_11d9d9: In the end, Pietro, I think we have to identify the breaking points in the premises

My worldview rejects the utilitarian arguments

The non-Catholic sources do as well

But you instead embrace the utilitarian arguments (prioritization)

So that is the breaking point, or a major one
User_52ac9c: Sharing content from ppl who hold the same opinion as you don't make the opinion a moral principle that everyone should be forced to follow
User_11d9d9: I agree. That's correct.
User_52ac9c: I already commented detailed on how it's not conclusive that fetuses before 6 months of gestation are even considered alive
User_11d9d9: We can still debate the moral principle, or identify that it is the breaking point.
User_11d9d9: Well, then that is what gets us back to square one.

People can read for themselves and they may agree or disagree with you on that premise.

As I said, a breaking point.
User_11d9d9: I already provided a long critique on that point (arbitrary gradualism).
User_52ac9c: The breaking point starts with the foundation of values. However, the breaking point is not the point in this discussion.
You are advocating for a law change, you want people to be forced to adhere to your values. That's the big problem. If you are against abortion, you can continue to be - I don't need to try convincing you that you shouldn't believe that. You believe whatever you want, your freedom. But don't touch others people's freedom.

For example, one can believe drinking is wrong - this doesn't give them the right to advocate for a law change to proihibit everyone from drinking saying that drinking is morally wrong or that they believe drinking is the worst thing a person can do, and that everyone should agree with him. If he thinks drinking is morally wrong - then he doesn't drink, he doesn't force everyone else who don't believe drinking is morally wrong not to drink as well.

And drinking is something we do for fun, so it's not even close to the importance of the topic we are talking about. No one would have their lifes destroyed for being prevented to drink, but people would for being prevented to abort
User_11d9d9: Already addressed that.

It's essential to see that it's not just a lifestyle question. If it's a human life, a life is at stake.

Quoting Alex O'Connor, who is an atheist:

"I'm sorry but the question of when abortion is wrong and when not is a deeply important philosophical question. If a foetus is a human life it is one of the most important questions that exists. Noting that it's not morally right in all circumstances is 'beating back progress'? " (emphasis added)

https://x.com/CosmicSkeptic/status/1275948161052413959
User_52ac9c: What about we don't debate. You have your belief - so you teach your kids and family that they shouldn't get abortion. And I, who doesn't have a problem with abortion, will continue living my life with my loved ones being able to pursue a medical procedure that can help them if (god forbid) anything happens to them
User_11d9d9: I already addressed that.
User_52ac9c: Now if you want to advocate that everyone (not just yourself) should not be able to get abortion, then you have a problem with me, because you're interferring in my freedom, in my potential kids freedom, and in my family freedom.
User_11d9d9: Agree to disagree.

But I emphasize it here again.
User_52ac9c: You didnt adress anything. You literally just said "it's not a lifestyle choice" and then cited a """source""" which is just a random individual who shares the same opinion as you. Focus on OPINION, not facts.

Similarly, I could argue that the earth is flat and then put the link of a random guy on twitter who is saying the earth is flat and claim that the earth is flat just because I said so (and bc the guy said so)
User_11d9d9: Perhaps a missing premise is that I believe the role of government is to protect rights.
User_11d9d9: I had already pointed that out in my original message that sparked the debate though.
User_e8db04: Your "agree to disagree" here costs lives.

Should I perhaps counter your argument with statistics showing that mothers' mortality rates have increased a lot ever since abortion is no longer available widely in the US?
User_11d9d9: But it helps us identify the breaking point.
User_e8db04: Where we disagree is that you believe the fetus' life is equal to the mother's. 

The fetus can't even think. It has never had consciousness. Maybe it'll be able to think in a few weeks or so, but "almost Christmas" means it isn't Christmas.
User_e8db04: A brain-dead patient in a hospital is undoubtedly human, for sure. But if they are taking up resources and time, which leads to the suffering or even death of other patients, is it immoral to you to pull the plug?
User_11d9d9: So it's a life?

We keep circling back between bases here.

What is the argument, the "it's not a life" or the "prioritization" one?

I have addressed them thoroughly.
User_e8db04: YOU are the one who keeps bringing this up.

We have all concluded that it's not relevant whether it's a life or not, simply as the mother's life takes precedence in either case. Effectively it's the same thing.
User_11d9d9: Utilitarianism again.

A breaking point.
User_e8db04: What can laws be BUT utilitarian?
User_11d9d9: Just.
User_e8db04: Define "just".
User_e8db04: Is "the greater good" not just enough for you?
User_52ac9c: You talk so much about logical fallacies and you keep using them. I never said that the government shouldnt protect rights - you're not being able to give an argument against personal freedom, and you're just distorting the topic.

First of all, I already said the fetus is not considered a living being. Biologists didn't reach a conclusion, so neither should you. Therefore, fetuses don't have rights. My plushie don't have a life too, and I don't expect the government to put rules to protect the integrity of my plushie just because I believe it has a life. If the biologist community comes and say that they found proof (not evidence, not theory, proof) that my plushie is alive and has feelings and feels pain, then we could start thinking about its right.

And no, fetuses before 6 months dont have feelings, awareness, counsciousness, or pain. They are literally a bunch of cells unless the scientific community says otherwise. The same way we believe the earth is round until the scientific community proves it's a square (likely it wont happen)
User_e8db04: You keep bringing up our beliefs on whether the fetus is alive. The truth is, the real world doesn't give a shit. The real world is going to kill a woman if she can't carry a kid. But this fact is clearly of no significance to you, because you're still arguing with your values over the facts.
User_e8db04: And most of all, what is "just" to you? How can you expect the entire world to subscribe to your moral values? Of course there are things that the majority of us can agree is wrong, but "it is sometimes justified to terminate a pregnancy to save a mother's life" is clearly not one of these heinous things that should be outlawed, yet you're insisting us all believe it anyway.
User_52ac9c: No one cares about the breaking point. You're the only one here trying to find what makes us disagree, and that's not the point. You're discussing as if you would playing a game or watching a circus performance, just for fun becase you're here trying to find a "breaking point" as if it was a fun puzzle. We are not discussing for the fun of discussion. We are discussing because you're presenting an oppresive view (that you're free to hold for YOURSELF) and wants to advocate for changing rules to apply this oppression on all of us, wanting to interfer in our lives, and in our loved ones lives.

No one here, besides yourself, is discussing to find what's the breaking point. I don't care what you believe, if you think fetuses are worth a human life, if you think idk that the earth is flat, if you think brains are made of gummy bears - you can believe WHATEVER you want. But you shouldn't try to force it onto us..if you are against abortion just DONT GET AN ABORTION YOURSELF. Stop trying to strip people and their loved ones of THEIR OWN rights
User_e8db04: I want to remain respectful but your rhetoric is KILLING WOMEN. 
I'm sorry, but you need to get a grip on the real world.
User_e8db04: Most of all, you're arguing all of this from a perspective that will never know the pain of pregnancy, childbirth, child raising, etc... you will never have to worry about being burdened with this after a sexual assault. You will never know just how debilitating it is.

Please stop making these decisions for the people who do go through that pain.

SA is already horrific enough as it is. Unwanted pregnancies are traumatizing.
User_52ac9c: I already answered that. And again, whether it's a life or not, there's no conclusion in the scientific community. What is a fact tho, it's that it doesnt have the features that all other lives have, such as feelings and awareness and counsciousness, so we shouldn't consider it (and in fact, we, society, DON'T consider it - as seen in cerebral death treatment) as worth it as a human life. I dont see you here discussing for the prohibition of letting patients with cerebral death go. Because they dont have counsciousness - their life (IF even existent) is not the same thing as other people's lives.

And this is only IF they have a life.

So, no, I don't believe they have a life (fetuses before 6 months), but if I do believe it or not, or if they have it or not, only biologists can argue, and even IF the conclusion was that they had a life, it still dont change the result, because it's not the same thing as a full life (again, IF life is even existent in them)
User_e8db04: I also want to note that abortion isn't even controversial globally. 

In China, it's unanimously agreed upon that it is standard healthcare. China has its flaws for sure, and the youth are very politically divided. But even still, they can all agree on that. 

It IS banned in certain cases, for example you're not allowed to get an abortion simply because you don't like the gender of the child. That is reasonable and just. But the people who have other valid reasons to get one, will have one fairly and safely.
User_52ac9c: I also wanted to remind of the danger of arguing that "there are strict values" and that "everything should follow this values strictly". Hitler could believe the highest value was that his ethnicity is the only one that should survive, does it justify his actions of killing everyone if he said "this is the highest of all inealiable rights" and sent a source with three Twitter posts supporting him and one article written by a nazi organization?
User_e8db04: Utilitarianism is flawed and it's valid to dislike it in a lot of circumstances. Lawmaking is not one of them. 

Laws are for the PEOPLE. You can't expect to run a country on your beliefs alone.
User_52ac9c: So the point is. If Hitler wants to believe it, he can believe whatever the "sheet" he wants. But he can't force it onto us - it's wrong
User_2a3dbf: yeah despite we hate each other sometimes we still understand what is good for all of us lol thank you for pointing that out
User_52ac9c: Similarly, if one wants to have very strict values, have it for yourself - not to be forced onto everyone else just because you and a group of people believe it's a "shared value"

Just to remind as well that there's no such thing as a "shared" values across the whole world. Think about it - for cows and pigs we must be like scary murderers wanting to eat them. So the argument of "this is and should be applicable in any situation for everyone" is just flawed

If cows and pigs could speak and were more intelligent, maybe they would be arguing that their lifes should be valued equally. And cows and pigs have waaaaay more counscious and aware than fetuses of less than 6 months... (obs: fetuses of less than 6 months have ZERO counsciousness - that's the agreement among biologists so far)
User_e8db04: Same with drugs. Chinese people all hate drugs, hahah. (There are political reasons for this. But I currently live in a city where drug use is one of the world's highest. A lot of people don't understand why people turn to drugs - it's not just to get their rocks off, but because their life is so painful they have nothing else to live for. This is a societal issue and not merely a personal one. If you can at least secure a life for yourself there is no reason to use it, hence why it's not a problem in a lot of areas.)
User_e8db04: China is very flawed but at least you will never be put in a position where you can't even afford basic food or housing. Sounds pretty just to me. Unlike the US where they just make you fend for yourself.
User_11d9d9: To compare the infinite dignity of a human life with the value and goodness of cows and pigs is preposterous.

That is a breaking point.

That's why we cannot agree.
User_e8db04: Can you just stop, man?
User_e8db04: You've done enough harm as is. Your rhetoric has done enough harm as is.
User_e8db04: Maybe go fund an orphanage or whatever. Be someone's maid. Go out and raise a kid properly if you care about them so much. 

Women go through enough already. If you want to make the world a better place for everyone it starts with action, and not taking their rights away.
User_52ac9c: You dont need to be pedantic, just use words everyone can understand. Using fancy words don't really make you sound the way you want
User_2a3dbf: bro had a chance to drop out of college/high school and raise the family if his partner is accidentally pregent (which happens, poor girl) but bro did not seems to have a partner and never understand
User_52ac9c: Now that I finished searching what "preposterous" mean, ill address your message
User_e8db04: To compare the hypothetical existence of a fetus' life to the infinite dignity of a living woman is preposterous but go you I guess 👍
User_52ac9c: You say that comparing humans to other animals (cows and pigs) is """preposterous""" (for other ppl who dont know what this is, like me, it means like "absurd").

I don't really know what to answer, except for:


"Omg, eating empanadas is preposterous!"

"Omg, believing that 7 is the best number of all is preposterous!"

I cant call it an argument tbh, abd I don't really know what you want to reach with this message. Ok, you think it's "preposterous", like, you thinking something is absurd changes something in what I said? No.

"I think apples are delicious while coconuts are not as delicious". This is not an argument
User_e8db04: Let's also not mention the fact that another reason why abortion is such a hotly debated topic in the states is because it's used as a political power play!
User_e8db04: But I digress. Clearly there is no consensus on action to be reached if you will continue to believe that the value of something that has never had a thought before is equal to that of a woman.
User_11d9d9: It is not "something" and it doesn't just merely have "value". It is a human life and it has dignity.
User_52ac9c: Btw, before you argue "you're reducing it to absurdity" which seems to be one of your to-go pre-packed arguments. The only person here saying something is absurd is you. Just because you say something is absurd, it doesn't make it absurd.

I clearly stated my thoughts and defined my argument. It's not absurd, it's a simple analogy that makes it easier to understand and clear
User_e8db04: My bad. Clearly there is no consensus on action to be reached if you will continue to believe that the dignity of someone who has no consciousness formed and has never had a thought of its own is equal to that of a woman.
User_11d9d9: No human life has ever more dignity than another one.

All human persons are created equal in dignity and rights.

That's another breaking point!
User_e8db04: IT CAN'T EVEN THINK.
User_e8db04: I'm serious my guy. Can you STOP?
We have explained to you, over and over, over and over, how your ideals are flawed. 

How they don't apply to the real world. 

You have not paid it any mind.

You continue to hurt us, for a belief in which you will never see the consequence of.
User_2a3dbf: bro idk if you care about that so much where were you when US army were in middle east
User_e8db04: I'm gonna pull it out...
Facts don't care about your feelings, or your "breaking points". 👍️️
User_52ac9c: Again, no one cares what the breaking point is. No one here, besides you, is discussing to find the breaking point or for fun. I dont think anyone cares where you disagree with us or not. In fact, you can disagree as much as you want, as long as you keep your lifestyle for yourself - not trying to force it onto others and change laws so that everyone follows rules created by your own values and own strict principles. If you are recognizing there are breaking points in principles, then that's good enough to understand that there shouldn't be a rule about that prohibiting everyone to pursue abortion. If there's a breaking point, it's simple:

If you're in one side of the breaking point, you can get an abortion if you wish

If you're in the other, do not get an abortion - no one is or will force you to - but don't be advocating for striping the others of their right to pursue abortion if they need and wish

Actually, you don't even need to think about it too much. You will never have to worry about abortion for the entirety of your life, so stop trying to rule how people who have the ability to give birth should live and advocating for stripping them of their rights
User_2a3dbf: can we do sth new
User_e8db04: Yes. Drug use.
User_e8db04: It's very prevalent in my city. There's a lot of factors for it, and one of the biggest ones is how difficult it is, even as a hardworking, educated person, to make a living for yourself.
User_52ac9c: I loved this. FA coding classes really makes things easier
User_2a3dbf: remind me of this
User_09dde9: [name] are u secretly a m30+ and have gotten here into this chat to check out the vibes, and wanted to make sure you go to a place where most people value protecting woman’s free rights so you came up with all these to be double sure? i can promise you that this is not a space where we kill women’s lives and i feel safe most of the time. 

i’m not mocking you, this is my genuine question at this point.
User_2a3dbf: i find a linkedin with the same name but im not sure if that's him
User_e8db04: My mom is a frequent user of XHS/rednote. During a period where American users migrated to it en masse, it changed my mother's minds about homeless people a lot.

Previously she believed that they were perfectly healthy, serviceable people who simply didn't get a job because begging was easier. Now she realizes that you can be constantly working and still be on the brink of losing your home, after seeing posts from Americans detailing the living expenses in North America.
User_2a3dbf: bro she use rednote it is the best social media
User_09dde9: 🔝🔝🔝
User_e8db04: LOL
User_e8db04: She's Chinese so of course, all of my friends use it too, but all of my friends just are there for collector communities haha
User_e8db04: In Canada living prices are also absurdly high, because most essential goods are controlled by a small handful of companies. There is no government protection against this, so these companies can charge high prices for essential goods like food.
User_2a3dbf: my boyfriend move to red note from ins becuase of the good feed algo + they never spam you with bunch of ads/bikinii girl
User_e8db04: LOL
User_e8db04: Aww that's nice
User_2a3dbf: then you really should spend some time in china the materials are so cheap and good
User_09dde9: go on xiaohongshu for cheap living tips
User_09dde9: they have loadssss, u can even find public toilet’s password there
User_2a3dbf: i didn't know what was organic veggie becuase i thought by default they are
User_e8db04: I was there for a month! (A little over a month actually)

It was so shocking to me when I could get a baked sausage from a random store for like 50 cents
User_09dde9: [name] you should also get on there i’m sure some people would participate in debate
User_2a3dbf: not sure if he will get exposure for his post
User_09dde9: if phrased correctly maybe
User_e8db04: Oh yes, I'm sure everyone on XHS would absolutely *love* to debate abortion... lol
User_09dde9: this way, you can find your people, we don’t get spammed and angry, problem solved 😺
User_e8db04: I miss Taipei so much man
More expensive than China but it doesn't have its own exclusive payment methods so I can actually use my platforms lol
User_09dde9: it’s actually not hard to link ur international credit card to alipay, my friends have done that when they came to china!
User_e8db04: Alipay... I need to learn how to use it
User_a4a8ef: https://www.instagram.com/reel/DN8I9qQAM2U/?igsh=ZWxjZG5wNmlrcmh3 jose that you?
User_17f6b8: I feel chemical experimentation and optimization, including recreationally, is part of the human experience.

And if not for prohibition, we could select better substances and create the social systems to mitigate the most acute problems.

Prohibition selects the stronger and more antisocial substances, in an adverse social environment. Creates criminal organizations. Makes people flock to suboptimal arrangements, like the gentrification of Ayahuasca. And gives the state license to break all sorts of freedoms to enforce it.
User_e8db04: I'm not for prohibition whatsoever! I agree that people in their right mind do have a right to try out new things with reasonable regulation, and strict, forbidding laws often cause more harm than good.

That said, I wanted to address the fact that the most common reason, at least from what I've seen, that people turn to drugs (especially hard, debilitating ones) because they simply have nothing else to live for. I think that's a problem.
User_e8db04: (A lot of artists I like have been prominent users of LSD and other hallucinogenics, for instance. But they're well-off, and don't feel like they need chemicals in order to find a meaning to live.)
User_e8db04: People with stable lives and happy families don't turn to crack cocaine out of nowhere, for instance (unless they're stupid rich to the point consequences don't apply to them).They might experiment with shrooms though, but that's nowhere near as dangerous.
User_e8db04: What I'm more-or-less arguing is that while drug rings are an issue, a good portion of the problem also resides in socioeconomics, and that a "war on drugs" should also include giving people a decent standard of life that's attainable. (For a similar reason I believe rehabilitation is a more optimal outcome than punishment for drug users.)

--- Conversation 28 (2025-09-27) ---
User_1be83c: Hi guys. I am shook. 



Source: https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2025-jeffrey-epstein-emails-the-network/?leadSource=uverify%20wall&utm_campaign=202509_BATC_winb_eng_epstein_supporters_winb_eng_epstein_supporters_Sept2025&utm_term=19643151&utm_source=subs-email&utm_medium=email&utm_content=15082676&embedded-checkout=true 


I think it is relevant enough to Minerva University for there to be a proper statement addressing Kosslyn's involvement with the university. 

For reference, Stephen Kosslyn was the Former Dean and Chief Academic Officer of Minerva Schools and co-author of the book "Building The Intentional University" with Ben Nelson.
User_1be83c: Can I get ASM's eyes on this?
User_da8a35: what the fuck
User_0378ef: 😬😬

"Professor Kosslyn had known Epstein for many years, and Epstein had given Harvard two gifts (one in 1998, the other in 2002), totaling $200,000, to support Kosslyn’s research."

https://ogc.harvard.edu/sites/g/files/omnuum7071/files/ogc/files/report_concerning_jeffrey_e._epsteins_connections_to_harvard_university.pdf
User_741235: I haven’t read any of the links, so not really sure about the specifics here, but is there a chance that Kosslyn’s connection with Epstein was centered around any other part of Epstein’s life than his sexual crimes? 

Because if there is nothing in the files that suggests Kosslyn knew about Epstein’s crimes… Maybe he actually didn’t know. And maybe we should slow down before escalating this to MU and all that
User_2c19b9: I think that regardless of how much or how little he knew, having Kosslyn being so closely involved with Epstein is *very* bad press for us, so there should absolutely be some sort of statement made on the matter
User_50db50: It's on Kosslyn wikipedia for forever
User_1be83c: I am concerned about the emails where Epstein says he is going to jail and Kosslyn asks how he can help.

But I do agree, and escalation to admin should bring clarity first to students/community, and official public statement later.
User_50db50: idk what minerva can say abt this tbh
User_8bbbff: But he isn’t involved w MU?
User_a56433: I don’t think he’s been involved with MU in years, but was heavily involved in the initial years where the curriculum was being set up
User_52ac9c: OMG THE CREATOR OF OUR CURRICULUM
User_52ac9c: He retired from Minerva, but he's basically a co-founder with Ben Nelson bc he structured all the curriculum and stuff. Ben Nelson founded Minerva and was like the businessperson, but Kosslyn created the educational structure
User_09dde9: he created HCs
User_da8a35: Istg you can’t trust men anywhere
User_df9f1b: 🥺🥺🥺🥺
User_da8a35: Fair enough, sorry, you can’t trust cis men who are attracted to women
User_da8a35: (Though I hear gay men often treat other gay men about just as bad as straight men treat women so idk)
User_a11b3c: google form ready for you!
User_a11b3c: babe i dont trust you
User_a11b3c: oh 10 times more actually
User_50db50: Cringe
User_da8a35: I am sorry to hear it, cant trust men it is 😢
User_8234f5: science of learning and all
User_7facf1: Harvard released a statement in 2019 and then a report in 2020 that [handle] linked. MU definitely needs to do the same and see if Epstein had any financial or creative ties to MU through Ben or Stephen. Also the fact that this link has been public since 2020 and there is no acknowledgement by MU (that I know of) is bad. Did Minerva big-wigs know about the connection before 2020 and did they ask Kosslyn about it after the 2020 report?

--- Conversation 29 (2025-09-30) ---
User_b2fa71: Back in 2019, Minerva released this when all of this was happening -
User_b2fa71: I believe either ASM or the Minerva Quest had brought up these same issues and this was Ben's response that was posted on the community portal in October of 2019 — they did at least address something to the community when requested, I don't think they put out any public statements but Minerva does have much less public visibility than Harvard

--- Conversation 30 (2025-11-18) ---
User_46b835: Csn someone share the current status on rotation cities and plans? M19 group chat wants to know. 

Are we actually moving to four cities? Do people have to stay with their cohort? And is Hyderabad staying in rotation?
User_09dde9: sf, tokyo, BA, berlin for m28. hyderabad will be an optional city for next sem, but we don’t know if it will continue running. and not a lot of flexibility there either, you’d have to petition hard to go.
User_09dde9: i don’t think they ever formally confirmed seoul and taipei are out but they are pretty much out…?
User_c325be: i think they have confirmed that the four cities Linda mentioned are what's going to be the case for all coming cohorts until further notice, and all other cities are not operational for the foreseeable future (but of course, whether you can trust what they say is a different question)

--- Conversation 31 (2026-02-01) ---
User_52c3df: https://substack.com/@literarymal/p-186221442

^ Interesting article on current post-grad trends in American Ed and politics!

--- Conversation 32 (2026-02-02) ---
User_f644b9: Bullying palentir employees is a lot of fun
User_c0b244: Would also recommend looking into the "Bermuda Triangle of Talent (https://fortune.com/2025/10/26/gen-z-college-selling-out-elite-universities-2025-admissions-mckinsey-harvard-oxford/)"! Definitely an interesting phenomenon
User_b84af7: “These firms cracked the psychological code of the insecure overachiever,”

Whoa

--- Conversation 33 (2026-02-02) ---
User_b84af7: I've been thinking about this all day. I'm an M29 who did not know anything about top unis or high-earning jobs before coming here. I'd be curious to know from upperclassmen, how much of this bermuda triangle do you think applies to your cohorts at Minerva (compared to maybe cohorts at more elite(ist) unis)? What do you personally do to fight it, if anything?
User_f644b9: A large part of minervans get sucked into it too
User_f644b9: Perhaps even the largest proportion
User_2a3dbf: it's a structural delimma
User_a72438: Agreed. But I think that in Minerva the problem has a bigger nuance. First, for most Minervans, money plays a bigger role than prestige. Not only are we likely to go back to SF (a very expensive city), which the article already touches on, but we're mostly international students with a 30k loan to pay in 3 years. For many, earning in USD or EUR is the best and easier option to pay this loan (and mind you, it is already a big privelege to say that jobs like this are the easier path), and big companies in established industries are way more likely to sponsor your visa or accept your OPT. Second, a large chunk of Minervans are CS or BZ majors and it has become a staple in these industries to equate success to fat paychecks in big companies OR to fat paychecks in YC-backed startups. Like you mentioned, most of us didn't even know this level of money and access was possible when we entered Minerva. However, when we learn the possibilities and start comparing, anything that does not match what is out there feels meh. Obviously, this is the fundamental problem. But you will see it hightened here because it is just a really good deal in the short term when you consider Minerva's profile. As much as I would love to see people (including myself) doing more outside the obvious, I think it is an illusion to hope that students pick riskier paths without the strengthening of other things (immigration policies, cost of living, cost of higher education and investment in different industries).
User_3c9f09: just resharing this: it was sent in m28 group chat earlier today
User_3c9f09: maybe it contributes to the discussion
User_570bcd: "But precarity is often exaggerated by young elites, who misappropriate wokeness to pre-empt criticism. There’s this frequent rhetorical move where people claim that career choices are above rebuke because people’s financial situations are complicated and personal. And it’s true that some young graduates shoulder heavy financial burdens, such as student debt, medical expenses, or supporting family members — the exact reason many advocate for a stronger social safety net. People of color have been barred for generations from accessing the riches of the American imperial pie. (Whether that is something to aspire to, of course, is between you and God.) But it’s worth noting that few low-income students statistically go into fields like consulting. And more often, when my peers speak of accepting certain jobs, and act though the alternative were honest-to-God homelessness, what they actually mean is that they cannot imagine slumming their twenties on less than six figures a year! I have had to physically resist bullying people who have said as much to my face. The reality is that certain jobs don’t merely offer an honest living, just enough to get by without fear — they offers lots of money, enough to ensure elite status." from the original article also fits here well lol
User_a72438: True. Like I said, it is the easier path. But I still think it is idealistic to hope that people choose the harder path, especially at Minerva. Most of us are blown away by the possibility of good money and safety, and rightfully so. Yes it is more than just honest living, but to be honest, in SF, paying your loan and maybe even helping your family, it is not generational wealth either. And even if it was, lots of us grew up hearing that we should take the first opportunity that could push us towards a truly comfortable life in a developed country.
Also, while statiscally, indeed, fewer lower income students make the cut, within Minerva, we have a much higher success rate, so, again, I think there is more nuance.
User_a72438: My point is, I'm not here to say that you should all sell your souls, but to say that, as someone who did, at this very point of my life, I don't regret it one bit.
User_540c39: It's sad that one is concerned about their own immigration status yet is willing to support an industry that profits from separating families and imposing heavy survailance in latino communities. no solidarity. not to say they contribute and profit from genocide. when you get too much money you forget who your actual community is, no? (for the avg minervans and not the rich ones)
User_09dde9: just remember to donate and help out your community. givedirectly is a great place to start
User_a72438: Many of us have debated and struggled with the ethical implications of choosing to work for big companies (I have personally discussed with other Minervans) and even the impact of choosing to leave your country and apply your talent and knowledge in other markets. I get it and agree with it. It is fundamentally a choice that benefits you and that most people take thinking of themselves first. And for many people, it is acceptable to be egotistical in one area of your life while creating things with the money and influence you get that can benefit people in your and other communities. I think in the end it comes to a personal assessment (and happy to extend the conversation and hear your take) of what is or is not enough to have a "net positive" impact or what is or is not acceptable for a given individual, especially given their background.
User_2a3dbf: It's not a binary option between selling souls and working for yourselves. In capitalism countries, you get marginalized when you are poor and your impact will be weaken as well. It make sense to have a non-linear development and try things out (and to earn some money).
User_a72438: Exactly. I don't think it is a simple math and I understand why so many Minervans follow it. It is a industry that traps you tho so I think the most important part is to always be reminded that there are more things out there and you don't have to do the same job your entire life if you don't resonate with it
User_c7fdd7: this is a very (extremely) simplistic approach to the situation
User_5041cf: I personally think that the widespread idea that people should avoid workplaces with questionable morality is flawed. It’s more complicated than black and white. I do think that you must have certain boundaries (like I personally wouldn’t go near Palantir) but in general I think the better idea to this matter is to encourage more people (including yourself) to apply to these places. If you have the right idea/way to do it then why avoid it? What is true is that many people are lining up to get the job and if all the people who see the wrong that these companies are doing are avoiding it, these companies will likely continue to be in the position of power with the same ideas reinforced.


My general sentiment is that, yes, there should be the space for people to keep on speaking against the wrongs of this companies, but there should also be the forward looking vision where the next CEOs are climate friendly, environmentally conscious etc. the current system was designed by people in power; new systems would also only be designed by people in power.
User_6c7187: best take I've seen on the topic 👍 if there's people that can change places, they shouldn't shy away from going to those places. A lot of companies operate in a morally Grey area, and most companies benefit from the evil these big companies do. Overall our goal should be to not let any system change our values, and use our power within a system to change it. And I also think there are some places that are straight up evil (working for a defense company is just an insane concept to me personally because they really should be completely dismantled).
User_09dde9: yess agreed (&[handle] i miss ur wisdom in ah112.)  hopefully the minerva education that we get from moving around so much would develop our core values that are not easily shaken.  so we are not easily changed by a system.
User_6c7187: yeah, I believe a lot of people still can get easily changed (which also relates to the topic of the original article) but people with strong moral beliefs and determination to change the world should be in all spaces. personally we can all make choices we believe to be the most impactful, and a lot of us (including me and many minervans, I believe) would much rather do that impact in non-profits, working with governments, start-ups and etc, but the presence of conflicting discourse and making opinions shakeable is very important for shifting the overton window of what should be acceptable and what can we do, back into a place where we can say "this thing in the world sucks. we all share this idea and we know our ability to change it. let's change it."
User_09dde9: Also that if one does have the privilege to explore career options that are not pressured by financial decisions such as student loans, then they should also look at other sectors that really need talents from higher education. At least as a point of exploration.
User_afd6e6: I think this is a pretty naive take and reminds me of this picture I saw in the substack article. 
Also, this mindset to avoid internal guilt is precisely why movements like EA are able to convince brilliant minds to keep working like dogs to maximize revenue for quant firms without anyone chasticising their decision. As someone who is currently taking the big tech route, I do not think my presence will change the long held status quo, and if anything, my protest will be met with harsh consequences (evident from the consequences that ppl who are involved in tech for palestine have faced and continue to do so). So to second what Esther already mentioned, you go to these companies to seek stability as an intl student, but once that is achieved, I believe that true change can only come from the impact you make outside of these corrupt profit-maximizing structures. Also, on a personal level, I'd like to be reminded of the harm done by my labor, and my choice (due to xyz circumstances), so that I am motivated to exit and not be engulfed by the appeal of stock options lol
User_09dde9: can u share the article if u can find it? would love to have a look
User_afd6e6: [handle]
User_5041cf: My point is that there’s also a space for change within the companies that I think is being overlooked. Neither my presence nor yours will change the world, but a culture of encouraging people with similar desire for change to get into this spaces of power might and I think the current sentiment, at least as I perceive it, discourages that.

This change will definitely come with pushbacks and consequences. This is also true for non profits, protests etc. We see everyday of death, arrests, cutting funding etc. Doesn’t automatically make it an impossible or naive endeavor 🤷🏾‍♂️
User_2a3dbf: I spent a lot of time doing social science research. for example, before and after BLM protest, there's no statistically difference in police gun violence. before and after mass shooting in school, no relevant laws that effectively reduce shooting events was hold.

you might imagine doing a JD and become a lawyer for effective changes, but how many years it will takes you to become an influencial lawer? how would you resist the corruption from the law system? How do you plan to deal with massive lobbying? can you even afford a Juris Doctor degree?

But you can also become rich after being in tech companies, and donate your money. you can also be a influencial tech leaders that eventually do lobbying and decide money goes to who.

Navigating how to make changes in the system is a long exploration and there's multiple ways to make impact. Some are corrupted by the money, but it does not means that spending time within the system is meaningless
User_afd6e6: I think the change is marginal at best, if at all, where the definition of said change is also blurred under the influence of the industrial complex. I'm sorry but the next revolutionary CEO that is going to save us from climate change isn't coming out of McKinsey or Google. It won't be a CEO at all to begin with. It will come from collective action (which is shunned away in big companies) and people power (where real impact is not measured by the difference u made by engineering a more skinny Iphone)
Your initial take, where you suggest that students should actually be encouraged to funnel into these companies is a bit unsettling for me as, by doing so, you allow most of them (regardless of their intentions that may show otherwise) to further shape the very systems that need to be challenged
User_5041cf: But my question is why not?
Referring to why the next revolutionary CEO isn’t coming out of McKinsey or Google

I mean right now, yeah I agree with you. The people at the top do not look encouraging, maybe neither is the next gen.. but why is it an impossible thought that corporations can be ethical? If it isn’t then what exactly is our point here? 

I will confess that it’s a lot easier to say just push a lot of people (or at least don’t discourage) and hope they get to the top and turn out alright. It’s not that simple, yeah. 

But neither is the alternative part of endless lobbying, and multiple people putting their bodies on the line with many deaths too. Now, I’m not saying this is not important, it very much contains the soul of it, but lobbying can come from a place of power too
User_2a3dbf: a proof by contradiciton: Boyan Slat (founder of The Ocean Cleanup) came from thiel fellow. Peter thiel is a 'evil tech bro' or at leaset controversial. A previous minerva prof Katie McAllister was working in BCG a similar consulting firm like McKinsey. Sheryl Sandberg — Former Google VP; later launched major gender-equity leadership efforts
User_5041cf: But yeah I still think people should have their personal boundaries. If there are companies you simply cannot work for, don’t. 

If you choose to work for them, then try your best to exert influence as much as possible, and bring up these topics. The more people who think like you in the company the better your chances are.

--- Conversation 34 (2026-02-03) ---
User_7facf1: Yeah so I answered my own question, I still don't have a clear picture but recent file drops have some crazy shit:

* Ben Nelson called with Epstein in 2013
* Stephen Kosslyn and Epstein talked extensively about Ben and Minerva funding. Stephen says a lot of fucked up shit I recommend going through the documents yourself.
* Epstein asks a lot of questions about funding and asks to see fundraising documents, reference to Benchmark Capital. 
* Stephen, Ben, Senator Bob Kerrey (still Emeritus on our board according to the website) planned to meet for lunch with Epstein in 2013. It is hard to confirm whether the meeting happened but based on the other references to Ben and Kerrey it is likely.
* Stephen and Epstein confirm a meeting accompanied by Ben Nelson, Jonathan Katzman, Teri Cannon, Miriam Rivera and Robin Goldberg at Epsteins NYC home. Again, hard to tell if it happened but I haven't found  indication that it did not either yet.

It's really hard to say what exactly the relationship between Minerva funding and Epstein is based on new file drops, but I highly encourage you all to read at least the documents where Kosslyn talks about Minerva with Epstein, highly revealing of his shitty personality. I have lost a few hours of my life to try and validate as much as I can so I do want to reiterate that I haven't found proof that Ben or the old leadership met with Epstein but it is pretty strong evidence in to suggest that they did.

Links and extra info here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1y1j6a3NimSvuiuJk0-joE8n9vgGifRotC6PXgUkZqA0/edit?tab=t.0

--- Conversation 35 (2026-02-04) ---
User_af01b7: a methodology question: I think I’m a bit dumb but in this research, you can’t just ctrl+f “Minerva”, right? Since all the files are separate/all over
User_c7fdd7: there are people who have indexed the files and made them searchable; there is even a chatbot somewhere
User_25c474: What shocks me is how connected this guy was
User_25c474: Here's a searchable index I found:
https://journaliststudio.google.com/pinpoint/search?collection=c109fa8e7dcf42c1&p=1&docid=77cf4302573c9877_c109fa8e7dcf42c1&page=1&q=Minerva
User_c7fdd7: https://www.reddit.com/r/dataisbeautiful/comments/1p251h4/i_built_a_graph_visualization_of_relationships/

outdated but relevant
User_8234f5: you can go though his „inbox“ on jmail.world (also photos and files and apps, like you’re on his phone kinda)
User_f644b9: Curious if Minerva will put out a statement
User_f644b9: Some emails are pretty damn fucking bad
User_f644b9: Like this one

--- Conversation 36 (2026-02-04) ---
User_c7fdd7: not so fun fact: when kosslyn was asking epstein for people that could invest in minerva, epstein recommended thiel, and apparently epstein asked thiel about it
User_df9f1b: not sure how fun this fact is
User_7facf1: source?
User_c7fdd7: https://www.justice.gov/epstein/files/DataSet%2010/EFTA01852332.pdf
User_6c7187: minerva not hesitating for a second to get the dark money bro this is crazy
User_6c7187: and it's not like thiel used to be a normal guy before or anything
User_a6494c: This is easy to browse as if you are logged in his gmail/ use keywords

https://www.jmail.world/
User_7facf1: fuck palantir even more I guess, thanks for sharing
User_c7fdd7: speaking of which, Minerva Project’s Series C (57M usd) was led by ByteDance
User_8eab43: looks like not only students complain about minerva marketing https://www.justice.gov/epstein/files/DataSet%209/EFTA00699953.pdf
User_f644b9: Bytedance poured like 200m into it or smth across all funding
User_f644b9: To be fair Minerva was the biggest fuck you to the investors in a while hahaha
User_f644b9: Crazy funding rounds crazy valuation prob 0 returns

--- Conversation 37 (2026-02-20) ---
User_a46705: hey guys! I found an interesting research finding a week ago that says DNA is 9.8 billion years old, which is more than twice the age of Earth. It was super interesting to go through the research paper itself [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1526419/] and I worked on replicating it with the different parts that some of the reviewers critiqued and it was more insane and it got to even bigger numbers so I'm interested to talk with people who are into the Bio area about this overall, here's the analysis and replication process I have done: https://itsbakr.github.io/dna-before-earth/

--- Conversation 38 (2026-02-21) ---
User_52c3df: https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2026/feb/05/in-the-end-you-feel-blank-indias-female-workers-watching-hours-of-abusive-content-to-train-ai
